Good morning.
Who, who do we have taking the stand?
I've got, um, Sarah Helm, the executive director.
Good morning, Sarah, have you?
Good morning. Good morning.
To everyone else in the gallery.
So we have you here for 10 minutes, uh,
to present on the Medicines amendment.
Bill. I will pass that time over
to you now if you wanna leave us time for questions.
Thank you. Yes.
Hello. Um, lovely to see you all.
Um, this wonderful committee.
Um, I'm Sarah Helm, director for the Drug Foundation.
I'm with yassic, our policy director.
Um, I, we are here to speak in support of this, um, piece
of legislation, possibly also to seek counseling
for some of the frustration.
Uh, we have felt trying to get, um, um, in particular, um,
some lifesaving medication, um, approved
and available to New Zealanders.
So, um, the people we serve in our sector have been, uh,
somewhat negatively affected by some
of the current restrictions, uh, that are in place.
Um, which is largely, um, you know, I just wanna,
we all know New Zealander is a small market
and some of the products, uh,
or medicines that we need available here, um, are
for even smaller markets within the market.
So, uh, leaving the onus on profit seeking, um,
big pharmaceutical companies, um, to apply
for these medications, um,
to be approved here just isn't working.
Uh, certainly not for us.
So, um, we've ended up in a situation here in New Zealand.
I think we've been trying to get Naloxone,
which is a medication
that reverses opioid overdose available to New Zealanders,
um, for many years before I was in my current role.
Um, and I've been in my role for almost five.
Um, we have ended up in a situation where, um,
intranasal Naloxone, a nasal spray, uh, version of Naloxone,
um, actually has PTA committee approval
or recommendation for funding.
Um, but there is no product available to be, um, funded.
So way back in 2019, we managed to get the product approved,
uh, through Mundy Pharma.
Um, and they subsequently left the market
since they left the market.
We have been, um, as a nonprofit,
been contacting every pharmaceutical company we can to try
and get them to go through the process.
Medisafe are wonderful.
They've offered to waive the fee, um,
but even that's not enough to coax them into applying
to get a product approved, approved.
Meanwhile, um, this type
of medication's given out freely in the us, um,
and uh, across the ditch in Australia.
It's available through a, a program in pharmacies.
Um, we have, um, uh, I just also,
uh, say it is been so, uh, frustrating
that we've considered becoming a pharmaceutical company
ourselves in order to get this medication across the line.
Now this is, uh, a small market for any
of these pharmaceutical companies,
but for us it's a huge issue.
It's not only potentially a huge issue,
but we lose three New Zealanders every week to o
to overdose, and that's mostly opioid related overdoses.
That is twice the number of drownings
and almost half the road to.
So while we, uh, work through, uh, trying
to get something through this process, um,
we are losing New Zealanders every single week.
Just also to draw your attention to, um,
you know, other medications.
For example, there's a, a, the amine injection,
I'm looking at my other way I pronounce things, apologies.
Um, that for people
with alcohol use disorder would be really beneficial.
It can help, uh, prevent, um,
I'm not even gonna say the things,
but some, some terrible, um, uh, medical outcomes for them.
Um, and it's currently being supplied
as an unapproved medication, um, under section 29, uh,
which leaves people in a difficult position with, uh,
potentially facing, uh, medicolegal issues.
Um, so we happily support this bill.
We support the jurisdictions that have been, uh, proposed.
We support, um, Medisafe being able
to maintain some regulatory control.
Um, and, um, yeah,
I think the, our main points started.
Oh, we also wanted to encourage, uh, for there
to be a really clear process for, um, patients, uh,
with lived experience to be able to engage in the process,
uh, would be, uh, beneficial as well.
Uh, Ilda, thank you. Thank you, Jenny. Thank
You very much for the work you do and,
and, um, coming in today to submit.
So just, uh, in terms of the, the two, um,
treatments you've talked about, is it a lack of funding
that is stopping either of those two being available?
No. Um, so with the, well, I can speak to the Naloxone,
perhaps you can jump in with the other ones.
It is, yeah.
Uh, lack of funding in what way? You answer the question.
Oh no, sorry. Um, I'm not really quite sure
about the time injection.
I think that it is currently funded, uh, for specific
patients and it is in clinical use, uh, for
In New Zealand. 'cause I, I know that it's,
Yeah, in, in New Zealand there it is used
as a section 29 medicine.
Yeah. In, in clinical practice. This is my understanding.
So that creates some medical legal problems
and it makes it more difficult for a health service to,
to actually prescribe because it has to be prescribed
for a named patient by named physician.
So that creates some issues.
Uh, but for Naloxone, I think it is
not only an issue of funding.
So we obviously would, would argue
that there is not sufficient funding for Naloxone.
'cause there is no naloxone funding
for the community provision of Naloxone for people at risk
of, uh, uh, of fatal overdose.
However, that's not the only problem.
There are some regulatory barriers for that as well.
And that includes, for example, the fact
that there is currently no approved product
that is intranasal naloxone, uh,
that is available on the market in New Zealand.
And we have heard from companies
that there's very little incentive
to actually come into the New Zealand market
and to, to get the product approved.
Uh, because it's a small population
and especially if a product is unfunded,
then it becomes an issue. So for
Them, it's not a viable supplementary on this chair.
That's good. Good. Um, so for them,
it's not vi financially viable
to come into the New Zealand market, is
That what you're saying? To go through
the approval process?
We did manage to get PTECH committee to recommend
that intranasal, no lockdown be funded.
That's how far we got. Right.
But it wasn't, um, it hasn't actually been funded yet,
so it could sit on the books for many years of course.
So that makes it even less, um, luing for a company
that's really in it to make profits versus save our, uh,
three New Zealanders every week.
Yeah. Good.
And while we have you here, um,
thank you for your submission.
And I know that methamphetamine is the second most harmful
drug in New Zealand and the most injected.
There has been research recently come out regarding the use
of smoking kits that would pot potentially reduce harm
rather than having injectables.
And I'm wondering if you have anything to say about that
and whether you would support
that from a harm minimization perspective.
I'd love to come and give you a full briefing on
methamphetamine actually,
and I have it on my list to do, to send you a bit of a,
an appraisal of the situation.
Um, and a little bit of what we think might be beneficial.
We, of course, have been feeding into the process that's,
uh, there at the moment in terms of smoking.
Um, certainly there are some advantages of being able to,
um, smoke versus inject.
You're more likely to, um, end up with addiction
and communicable disease if you're injecting.
We know we don't have full access to needles.
Um, and we could do with some, um, ability
to have harm reduction within our misuse
of drug act, which is a different law
And, and they're currently outlawed.
Is that, thank you. Thank you. Yeah,
Thank you. Um, got Carlos
in.
Yes. Thank you for coming. I'm just very interested on
your form number 12 about the patient improve in
the approval process.
Do you, do you reckon that will be kind of a,
a public consultation
or they just, um, you believe that the, the agency just need
to contact the individual?
Um, patient committees?
Uh, I think there's a few pathways for this.
I could imagine a system where, uh, through which, uh,
mes safe or the regulator would, uh,
would make an announcement about, uh, medicines
that are considered through that verification pathway.
Uh, and that would invite patient input.
I would probably envision envisage a system through which,
uh, MEAP would proactively contact, uh,
recognize patient groups and mm-hmm.
And use some of these channels to communicate directly
and to maybe identify some of the early concerns.
'cause quite often patient groups have really good
connections, uh, with the international body of knowledge
and with the developments overseas.
So they could provide really good, um,
input into any early safety concerns with newer products
or into, uh, some of the issues stemming from the use
of certain generic products that may not be, uh,
may not just have such a good track record
for certain conditions for certain groups of patients.
So I think it would be a valuable addition to that, uh, to
that verification process through Med Savee, uh,
Han Yeah, I was going to ask about patient voice
and the approvals process
or, um, at least consideration of, uh, patient needs.
Um, but in thinking about workforce demands
and, um, the broadening of health professionals
who can engage
and now, you know, could potentially prescribe, we do have,
um, you know, a heavy burden already
on a stretched workforce.
Um, what are your thoughts around, um, the need
to resource this to be effective?
It could have a, I mean, we,
I don't know if we've thought about that fully,
but I'll just chip in and hand over to you Yauk.
But, um, the longer you leave health issues,
the more burden goes onto the system, right?
So maybe, um, there's a trade off
of making medications available, uh, earlier down the,
down the pipeline.
And just some feedback that I've received from, um,
some nurse prescribers who are really looking forward
to this to be able to help, um, in the way
that they can alleviate, um, some of the wait times and, um,
and open up for community to come in earlier.
So, um, it is a positive.
Um, but of course, you know,
the wider workforce issues are always an ongoing concern
And there is some regulation still maintained in the
legislation, isn't there? So,
Thank you.
We're at time now. Thank you.
Thank you very much for coming in for your submission.
We'll be in touch with methamphetamine.
Thank you. Um, next we have the New Zealand
initiative and Dr.
Eric Crampton. Dr.
Crampton, good to see you in front of the committee.
Great, great to see you, as well said. Thank you.
Um, first I really enjoyed everything that Sarah had to say.
I agree with her. Um, there are an awful lot of reasons
that drugs are slow to reach the New Zealand market.
The Medicines Act is, is one of those reasons
it's good to try and fix this.
This part of it doesn't solve every problem in the world,
but it solves an important part of the problem.
I don't think it quite goes far enough though.
If we think about the reason that drugs are slow to come
to the New Zealand market, in my view, is
that we are a small, relatively poor country at the far end
of the world that will not be at the top
of anyone's agenda in getting the regulatory affairs team
to deal with paperwork.
First, you'll run a target the markets
that are most lucrative because
that's how you pay the bills.
Then when your regulatory affairs teams are freed up,
they move to the next market,
to the next market, to the next market.
It can take years
after a drug has been approved
by at least two markets overseas
before anybody puts them into the
New Zealand approvals process.
This is a problem. Far Mac will drop drugs from their
consideration list if they have not been approved.
They've done this before. We documented in our submission
where they had the large majority
of drugs pulled from their consideration in one
of their evaluations was for the stated reason
that there is no known, um, approved product
or anybody trying to get it approved in New Zealand.
Alright, that's the under underlying problem.
A faster verifications process may help with that problem
if it encourages companies
to move New Zealand a little bit up their list.
If we're slightly less hassle ridden,
then maybe we go up their list a little bit.
But I expect that it will still take years
before anyone submits new medicines to this process.
Existing Section 29 pathways are inadequate.
We've already heard some of the problems discussed here,
and the bill as amended
or the, the, the proposal here does not broaden
things far enough.
You will have caught the piece
by Dylan Mordant in the New Zealand Medical Journal,
where he talks about the moral hazard
that paramedics are often placed in
where they are not approved prescribers
for section 29 medicines,
but they're often left in a spot where the only medicine
that will work to save patients is ones that one
that is not yet approved.
So you're stuck in a quandary.
There was a note, an excellent note from Johana Linden
earlier about resourcing the paperwork burden through
existing Section 29 pathways is massive
for these prescribers.
I don't think that what you've got, like
what you've got is an improvement,
but it doesn't get us as far as we need to go.
I think that there are two basic options that you've got.
You can either move to the automatic approvals process
that was promised in two coalition agreements signed
by the National Party in New Zealand first
and the National Party in act,
which doesn't require a verifications pathway,
but automatically deems a medicine approved if it has
been approved by at least two others.
The alternative would be to set a fast track, uh,
a simplified section 29 pathway for medicines
that have been already approved by two others.
We're in that case, not dealing
with an experimental treatment
or anything weird, it's just that nobody has been bothered
yet to put it through a New Zealand pathway.
And it would almost certainly be approved
if it were put through.
We had gotten some work done by students looking
to see if they could find any cases
where meds safe has actually protected us.
It is easy to find cases where they have added years
to decade of delay.
It is hard to find cases
where they have added any protection
after considering well have the Europeans found anything
of the Americans found anything
of the Canadians found anything.
The Australians, the Swiss,
the FDA on its own has a larger drug.
Um, maybe they, maybe they don't now with what's going on
with Trump, but they've got a larger approvals team budget
than we have an entire P Act budget.
We should rely more heavily on
approvals already done by others.
I'll assume that folks have read my submission.
I'll shut up and leave it to questions.
Excellent. Dr. Vera followed by Cam.
I, I wonder if we can just have a bit of please back
and forth on, on the excellent points you raised.
I think I've counted between your
and your submission maybe three, uh, reasons why,
uh, drugs might be slow to be approved in New Zealand.
You've mentioned what I'd call the indirect cost
of application, so the opportunity cost Yep.
That firms have to, um, weigh up when they think about
where they apply to first.
Then there's the direct cost.
Uh, we heard from the proceeding submitted
that even when the DEC direct cost was removed, uh,
that didn't incentivize drug companies sufficiently
to place their application.
And then I'd add a third to your list, uh, to that list,
which is, um, particularly for off tat medicines, which both
of the medicines mentioned by the drug company, uh,
drug Foundation would've been there's no financial incentive
or profit, uh, even in a small market.
Yep. Uh, what do you think of that framing?
Uh, is there any you'd add or subtract from the list?
Those that seems reasonably comprehensive,
automatically approving those kinds
of medicines would reduce that barrier.
And could you, um, do you have a, uh,
better understanding of this part of the system than I do?
It seems to me that sometimes the absence
of a process within Medisafe is used by Far Mac as a,
as a sort of excuse for not keeping on something on the,
on the list of, uh, uh, investment options.
It's still, still pursuing.
Whereas the, the fact is, if we, uh, needed that medicine,
we shouldn't just be passively waiting for the medicine
to appear in front of us.
Mm-hmm.
It seems a general problem
where the public sector here will decide
that a company's failure
to put a drug into New Zealand's approval process is their
fault rather than ours in trying
to actively get it here to help people.
And, um, I did notice your slightly, um, mischievous
quant, well, let's say, uh, out there quantification of, um,
the instances where, uh,
the few instances we feel Medisafe has, uh, uh,
protected the public.
I guess I'd ask you, do you have any understanding
of the quantity of medicines
that we, the gap between what is currently approved
and what's in regular clinical use?
So, so that section 29, um,
I have no visibility on that, but I would love to know it.
It's an inadequate pathway.
And the other problem
that we've got in the legislation has put up is
that provisionally approved medicines aren't included.
So all of the problems that we had during the COVID period
where people were slow
to get vaccines into our approval process, slow
to get treatments into our approval process,
those wouldn't be solved at all by this
because they were provisionally approved
overseas. We need to
Broaden that. Didn't bring a therapeutic
products bill to solve, to solve
that, but sorry, just to make sure that for the record,
it's, it's, um, uh, clear what we were discussing earlier is
that there's a large number of medicines prescribed
through Section 29 and they're not currently approved.
And we have no understanding of the size of that workload.
I don't have an understanding of it.
I would expect that the workload facing a lot
of medical practitioners would go down
if we had the simplified pathway for Section 29 medicines
that had been approved by at least two others,
where you get rid of a lot of the documentation paperwork,
but just maintain the supply chain documentation
to make sure that any imported product, if it needs
to be chilled, has been imp import
imported in a chilled condition.
That it's not counterfeit, that it's not a batch
that was rejected from a foreign market
because there was some defect in it.
Making sure that the supply chain is
clean, that's important.
The rest of it for medicines that have already been approved
by two others, you shouldn't have to have that.
I'll just make the final point if none
of my colleagues are going to
Okay's. Got one.
I have got one, I think. Yeah.
I, I just wanted to hear, hear, um, your,
your assessment if someone was to say, we need to act
as like a global, uh, player and actually contribute to
Absolutely. I love
That. Yeah. Could
you expand it?
So, so we, if we are just, I mean, piggybacking say off rule
of two and making it automatic,
what do you say to New Zealand?
Having to, uh, and Med Safe play its part in approving some
other countries could also have, it
Would, perhaps, it would be excellent if Meds Savee played
a role in working
with others while they are doing the initial approvals.
Offloading, like if the Europeans or the Canadians
or the Australians wanna offset
or offload some part of that work over to Med States so
that we can do our part in getting that first set
of approvals through that would be super.
Do you see any, there's no
path of that in the bill currently.
Did you see any way of making that happen?
I don't think that there's any path for it in the bill,
but I'm not sure that there's
anything that's required of it.
It would just be an operational matter for Med Safe
to be discussing with others, but Dr.
Rell would know more on that than I would,
But basically we could, we could have the rule of two
where we automatically approve
and also be good global payers
in the world of medicine. Absolutely.
Go out there and try. Absolutely.
So long as we ask Med Safe to be working with others,
to seek opportunities for them to offload some work
to New Zealand in places
where we've developed expertise and play that role. Yep.
And, okay, so, So stop on that. Yeah.
Um, would, would other jurisdictions welcome our input?
It's all very well for us not to do it,
but would they see the work we could contribute
towards being of value?
I don't have visibility into that.
I wish I could answer, but I'm sorry.
Okay. Oh,
Yeah. And, and just wanted
to ask you, in your research,
did you come up with any numbers about
what, uh, what is it called? The, um, grave,
The invisible graveyard. Yeah.
Do you have any numbers on on where,
where we actually could be if we were trying
to help New Zealanders rather than go through this, uh,
approval process to make sure we don't harm too much
Important drugs were delayed for years to 12 years.
Um, I haven't got a number on how many people died
or were harmed as consequence,
but the invisible graveyard is large.
Yeah. And nobody gets fired for delaying a drug. Yeah,
That's right.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Thank you. Or
Not funding. So
Co final comment, you, Mr. We're
Over time chair.
What is your organization's view on the idea
that government should be setting strategic priorities
around New Zealand's medicines needs?
And, uh, if not, and,
and seeking for those applications to be made
or approvals to happen proactively?
Oh, first best we have something like an automatic
approvals process through Rule of two.
So it becomes irrelevant. That is PX consideration of
what is a strategic priority for funding,
because it'll deliver the most
benefits in galleys and Callies.
That's important. If we don't get there, then I,
I've understood that that's already part of the process,
that if drug companies expect P Act would approve something,
they might hasten to get a medicine into our pipeline.
'cause there might be a bit of premature from PX saying
that it passes their cost benefit assessment.
Really though, we are, and,
and you might be stuck in that there's,
we missed some opportunities in that
during the COVID period,
but first best is fixing the Medicines Act so
that we no longer have to rely on that kind of process.
That we don't require Medscape to be reinventing wheels.
And we don't require international companies
to put New Zealand ahead of much larger
and more lucrative markets
for their regulatory teams. Prioritizations,
Thank you. We're, we're,
we're over here. Um, thank you Dr. Kran.
Thank you all. Very good Submission. Appreciate it.
Okay. Next we have Ungs New Zealand
with Dr. Graham Jarvis, the Chief Executive Officer.
Welcome, Dr. Have you here for 10 minutes?
I'll sit down slowly. Mr.
Chair, while there, a handout is forthcoming
to all the select committee, so I'll just
pause for effect if I may.
Thank you. All right.
I'll start that time now. Thank you. Thank
You. Uh, Koto
Kota.
Um, good morning to the Health Select Committee.
It's good to be here. Um, medicines New Zealand's,
obviously the Industry Association.
We represent the innovative biopharmaceutical industry, so
companies involved in the research
and development of innovate
and modern, modern new medicines.
I don't represent the generic
sector, so wanna be clear on that.
We also have as associate members, uh, a range of, uh,
entities involved in clinical research, clinical trials
as well, which are an important aspect of any health, uh,
research, uh, ecosystem such as one here.
Thank you very much for, uh, taking the time
for this oral submission.
It follows on from what is a very extensive, uh,
25 page long written submission.
And every word is worth its weight in gold.
Let, let me tell you, um,
but to ease your burden, um, select committee we have
provided for your viewing pleasure
and glorious technico this morning.
A corrected copy of Appendix two, which is a summary
of our drafting recommendations.
Um, we think that's quite important.
It corrects and clarifies a few issues, um,
and actually makes a read through
and a cheat sheet for you, uh, quite clear
because Time's limited today I'm gonna try
and cut to the edited highlights
and not read through the 25 page submission.
Um, overall Medicines New Zealand is supportive
of the amendment bill, but notes in certain submissions, uh,
components of our submission, there are drafting changes
that will be needed because there seem to have been some,
what we would call unintended consequences.
Um, the areas of concern were highlighted in the Annex two,
uh, or appendix two.
And we have provided solutions, uh,
which we hope the officials
and the select committee will take on board, uh, to,
to turn this bit of legislation from
what is a relatively good concept into something
that is excellent and has usability across
three critical areas.
One is speed, one is utility
or the ability for stakeholders to actually utilize it.
And the third is to actually increase the certainty, uh,
that is written in the legislation.
'cause there are areas of uncertainty at
the moment as it's written.
These affect the,
the general government policy statement on it, which is
to increase patient's access to medicines.
We don't think at the moment that it's
as optimal as it could be.
So look, I'll, I'll whip through as quickly
as I can some of these areas.
The first one is speed.
Um, words do matter in legislation
and these are really critical word in the schedule attached
to the legislation, which is working as in working days.
Now, ironically,
you've just scored an own goal if you include that
because at the moment, 90% of all submissions
by prescription medicines companies have a
90 day turnaround.
That's 90 calendar days.
If you introduce the term working days,
that increases it by 40%.
You're not slowing, you're slowing it down,
you're not speeding up anyone's access to medicines.
Mm-hmm. So that needs to be corrected
and we have got the solution written out around that.
And the answer to section 24,
there's also an issue around clinical trials.
New Zealand is very good at getting approval
processes for clinical trials.
45 days, you're gonna turn it from 45 calendar days into
45 working days.
Australia and all the other territories that are competing
for clinical trials are gonna thank you for that.
'cause that is one value proposition we've got.
So we think that the corrective solution
that we've put in the paper around putting 65 working days
and 33 working days is solution
around statutory timeframes, which those are
and are in the legislation.
We also raise a rather fundamental issue
around the verification pathway.
Why not state the statutory timeframe in the legislation?
The amendment bill, we have proposed that you need
to add the 10 days working days
for the screening validation step
and 30 working days
for the application verification stage of the process.
That is not in the legislation, we would argue just
as other countries have got it in their primary legislation,
Europe and Australia, so should New Zealand.
And you've already got it for the change management
notifications in the clinical trial.
So just being consistent, that needs to be altered.
Certainly that in terms of the area of certainty,
I'm gonna cover off the need to have better IP provisions
in line with what's already in the Medicines Act.
So we, we have asked
for a slight change in the way the wording is written
to include the time
where the regulator is undertaking initial
discussions with the company.
That should, that should be included as part
of the IP protection period currently is written.
It is not. And that is not in alignment
with good OECD practice
or in fact with, with the rest of the Medicines Act.
In terms of the Section 29,
we do offer some pragmatic solutions.
We are happy with the proposal because things have moved on.
More people are involved in prescription medicines such
as nurses, um, midwives, others,
and we know that there will be a few submissions on
additional healthcare workforces getting access to it.
Our view is you actually need to better capture the role
that in fact, uh, importers
and wholesalers play, uh, in that process
and the time that they're involved in there.
And that needs to be put into the legislation rather than
as a letter that was written in 2013
to stakeholders from medisafe.
You need to actually capture in the
legislation those changes.
And also if there is going
to be an exemption under section 29, you need to talk
to the actual primary organization, uh, those
that are the consent holders.
If you think there's a supply issue,
don't just assume it if your government or the officials.
So there needs to be better engagement.
So we ask for changes there. Now, final bits on the utility.
Um, we actually think in terms of
recognized regulators, we are very good with that.
But you should have a definition in the bill.
Don't name them because the list
that you've currently got is in the complete one anyway.
You don't mention the FDA, you mention a component of it.
You miss out all of the other components of the FDA
to future proof this legislation.
It simply needs a good definition of
what the New Zealand government
and regulator view as a recognized reg regulator,
what the characteristics are for that.
We think that's a useful solution.
And also to increase the utility, we do actually consider
that submissions can be made by companies
that include provisional reference approvals
or conditional reference approvals from overseas regulators,
recognized overseas regulators.
And in a really pragmatic solution.
Why don't we just do what Singapore does instead
of requiring two full sets
of reference regulator evaluation documents.
Why not ask for one like the Singaporeans have,
this system asks for two,
that does create some significant issues
in terms of futility.
Look, I've raced through this
to hopefully have some time for questions. Um, we
Do. And
Ingrid, thank you for the thank you for your time.
Thanks for a great submission.
Just looking at cart one clause seven, with the, um,
timeline you'd like a statutory timeline of 10 working days.
Mm-hmm. Um, do you foresee
a time when actually it would be better
to have an even shorter period
and perhaps that could be put in regulation so
that we don't have to come back and the act,
and I'm thinking also about your emergency criteria in
your submission.
3.2. Point two.
Yeah, thank you. Um, look, we, we think that we are,
we are trying to be comfortable
and work within the regulator.
We realize that they have resource constraints just,
just like anyone else.
We think 10 working days is acceptable.
Uh, we like the fact that if it's included in legislation,
everyone has kept on us, including the sponsors,
but also more certainty is gained by patients,
patient advocates, healthcare practitioners, in terms
of knowing that this process has a defined timeframe to work
through, and that the pathway will come through.
As we've seen in our submission, we,
we calculate this whole process would take about four months
from way to go, including having those defined timeframes,
which is a, a lot quicker than what we've got now.
Dr. Vera and Then Carlos, uh,
Mr. Jarvis, you heard the proceeding submission.
Mm-hmm. What, why doesn't your organization favor
automatic approvals?
Um, because that has unintended consequences
around parallel importing and other activities.
I, I've just received some notification from a,
a colleague who's been attending a conference about
what, that it would actually mean.
People flood the market.
Um, and the product may not necessarily
what you think it is, you may end up
with counterfeits products coming in.
There is no flaw back for the regulator to go
after a sponsor who has been acting in a,
in an unsatisfactory manner.
And also, I would also argue global harmonization processes
don't have automatic approval processes like this.
So in terms of that, it, it doesn't quite make sense to us.
We're not supportive of that particular
Component. Could you, um,
please, I, I think this is important.
Could you please explain what the unintended consequence
with respect to parallel importing is for people
who don't regularly exist in the world
of importing medicines?
So I'll give you an example, um,
of a practical example of what's just happened.
When, when there's little
or no regulation, regulatory approval process, um,
in the Pacific Islands, there's just been a survey done
by the Therapeutic Goods Association
or TGA administration in Australia
of 445 medicines of all types.
Um, they have found that 25%
of them aren't what they say they are.
So from a patient safety
and health system perspective, that's not a good outcome.
And that's simply because there is no regulatory approval
process that is followed.
The, they just come into the marketplace.
So there are unintended consequences if you're just gonna
have parallel importing.
So the benefits you see in the bill
as currently drawn is it reduces the work
of your members in getting through a regulatory process
and the regulate that happens faster.
But there's actually no sort of guarantee
of increased access to medicines for New Zealanders
through this bill because we're still dependent on
pharmaceutical companies wanting to submit.
Well, I'm just going to give you a a, a bit
of a home truth here.
Most of my member companies don't delay, um,
putting submissions into New Zealand.
They treat it as a first wave, if you will.
Uh, from so from the innovative companies,
and I think a few of them are presenting,
they make submissions at the same time.
They've put it into the EMA, so the European
into TGA as well.
So it's not around that, as you've correctly ascertained
and has been discussed by the select committee.
It's a two phase process.
You've got the registration process
and then the reimbursement.
The majority of prescription medicines are
publicly reimbursed in New Zealand.
If the environment is not optimal,
that's gonna slow down the process. Okay.
If I could just, um, go to Carlos one more supplementary,
because that's a really important thing.
Mm-hmm. Um, is it the fact,
is it the case that there is a risk
to public safety if an applicant
or sponsor, I think it's called in the legislation,
does not stand behind every, um,
ev every approval can. Is that correct?
Yeah, I think that's absolutely true. You want,
Can you explain how it plays out? Yeah,
Yeah.
You need to have the sponsor named and
and contactable. Absolutely. Carlos.
Uh, I just wanna comment on your, um, your suggestion
or your opinion on 22 A.
When you, when you say
that our bill should open up not only those full marketing
authorization or
or those drugs, uh, fully being approved, do you want that
to be open up to more like professional
and conditional approval as well? Those
Yeah. Provisional as
well.
So yeah, but if you are wanting to get access
to the newer medicines,
often they'll have provisional consenting from overseas.
They've gone through as we have provisional consenting here,
the way it's been proposed in the legislation doesn't
open up that opportunity.
Yes. So it limits utility.
Tell me, because obviously when those drugs are being
approved on probation or conditional approval,
it means they don't have enough medical evidence
to prove the safety of the drugs yet.
So what safeguard do you think we should put in there?
Like, or, or if, if we do that, do we increase the,
the risk of the public safety?
Well, generally there'll be one,
there'll be definitely one for approval
and that would probably be with the FDA.
They're usually the first market in the word world.
So what we're saying is if you need a second one,
which is what's required under the legislation,
look at having some additional flexibility to allow that
to be a provisional consent
or a conditional consented medicine.
That's what we're saying. So we're not saying completely.
Yeah. Just to be clear on that.
Yeah, it's the solution. Said
We're at time. We're over time.
Thank you. But I wanna say thank you.
Thank you so much. Yes. Very good.
Alright, next up we have, uh,
the Wellington Community Justice Project.
Thank you.
They're not here. Okay.
Um, following that we have, uh, John McDonald, um,
Faray joining us via, is is he available?
Yeah. Yeah, but I'm not opposed
to, oh,
We have Dr. John there,
Dr.
John at Sam Dale here, chair of the health committee.
Very good to have you here with us today. We have you here.
Yorta Yorta. We have you here for five minutes. John.
I will hand that time over to you now. Thank you.
Um, as clear from the document I've sent in,
I'm quite opposed to especially part one of this bill.
Um, Medisafe is currently a fairly weak organization
and not doing a good job at
protecting New Zealander's Health.
Um, it has a number of flaws.
If you weaken it further, it might be best
to just abolish Medisafe completely
and will end up dealing with incidents of
dangerous medication and dangerous use
of medication under the Crimes Act.
And I'll outline various charges
that could be applied in that situation.
Um, the main theme of what I've sent into this committee is
that your kind of streamlining corruption with this, um,
two approvals process.
So if a dodgy drug company, of which there are many
and it's well documented, um,
they corrupt officials at the FDA in the us,
then they engage in some form of regulatory capture
with the TGA in Australia
and then they effectively get access
to the New Zealand market for free at the end of it.
So this bill is effective at
streamlining that corruption process.
They don't have to engage in so much corruption
and regulatory capture of the New Zealand mid safe
because they've already got those other two agencies.
Another question that arises from
that is why is the FDA in Health Canada a recognized
regulatory authority and another organization such
as the Tanzania Medical and Device Authority is not?
And that's actually a serious question here
because I've just been on the Tanzania
medical regulators website
and they actually do testing there.
They actually have testing laboratory.
So I would personally trust the Tanzanian medical regulator
over Med Safe because I think they're a bit more skeptical
down there about drug companies
and they might actually do some independent testing rather
than just trusting the drug company's documents
or approving medication.
Um, I apologize for some of what's in my document.
It was a bit of copy and paste from the gene
regulation bill.
So there's a few confusing references in there.
It's 'cause I was referring to the gene regulation bill.
They both cover, um, regulatory failure
and you are weakening what is already a fairly
flawed regulatory regime.
Um, what I've highlighted in there,
and I highlighted with the Gene technology bill as well,
is this clinical evaluation of the COVID, um,
mRNA vaccine from Pfizer.
So this is the January, um, 2021 version of it.
What I keep on raising with this is that there are two
to four pages of serious adverse events
and deaths in that document.
As the public, we can't see what those are
'cause those were redacted,
but they didn't redact the table of content.
So we know there was at least two pages of them in there.
So they might have been dismissed as not related
to the vaccine, probably probably by someone paid by Pfizer
to say that, but they were there
and they should have been con concerning signals.
Now what I'm currently doing is I've got an OIA
before Ministry of Health.
They're two months late getting it to me.
But what I wanna know is
that while doctors in New Zealand were being persecuted
by the medical council,
censored told they can't question the safety
and efficacy of those Pfizer injections.
Was Med Safe sitting on those two to four pages
of serious adverse events
and not informing the medical council?
'cause if our regulator was looking
after New Zealand's health and safety of New Zealanders
and the integrity of our medical profession,
if they learned in the media
that a doctor was getting persecuted
for being an anti-vaxxer
and asking some questions about the safety
of this new medication
that's being rolled out on a nationwide scale
and saying what pregnant mothers may,
may not be the best people to be taking this.
When they heard about that in the media,
med Safe should have contacted the medical council
and said, look, we've got this document from January, 2021,
it's got two to four pages of serious adverse events.
Now they might not be confirmed as related to the jab,
but we should at least let the medical counsel know
that maybe they shouldn't be persecuting those doctors
for raising concerns
because the concerns are in those documentations.
Now in this bill,
you've got confidentiality causes in there.
Now we shouldn't be in a situation where confidentiality
and protecting the commercial interests of a drug company
or a biomedical gene tech company
comes at a priority over the health and safety
and informed consent of New Zealanders.
So if you weaken Med Safe anymore, might
as well just abolish it.
We'll sort all this out with the Crimes Act,
but it's actually worse than useless
to have a regulator in there which
people think has approved something as safe
and effective when basically
what they're doing is trusting either a dodgy drug company
or dodgy regulators from overseas.
Thank you. I Think that's done.
Um, if you've got any questions the right time, I can ask.
Thank you John. Thank you for your submission.
Uh, we are at time.
Um, appreciate you taking the time to present to us today.
Got it.
Okay. Next, um,
do we have the Wellington Community
Justice project available?
We do. Excellent. Welcome
Kiara.
Good morning Ada. We have you here for 10 minutes.
Uh, if you wanna leave us time
for questions at the end, you may.
And that time to now. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, Koto, thank you for having us here today.
My name is Jim and this is Finn
and we are here representing the Wellington Youth Justice
Project, a student run initiative
by volunteers at the law school at AKA New Zealand
Victoria University of Wellington.
Um, while we broadly support the medicines Minute Bill,
we have two submissions today.
Um, the first suggesting increased ministerial
accountability for appointments
to the Medicines classification committee.
Mm-hmm. As per section nine three
and the second regarding the criteria
for a recognized regulatory authority defined in Section
22 A.
Um, I'll pass off to Finn for our first
Thank you for having me and thank you for having us.
So the Wellington Community Youth Justice Project is
concerned that the proposed amendments to Section nine three
failed to adequately limit the minister's power
for appointing members to the, uh,
medicines Classifications Committee.
The minister is given discretion in appointments
and the qualification is
that the minister themselves would be satisfied
with the suitability.
We believe that appointments to this committee ought
to be tightly regulated.
The main issue is that the criteria is too vague.
The appointments could become politicized.
While we can usually rely on good faith
and competency of ministers to make correct choices,
it is not impossible that a minister
could misuse the ambiguity to appoint members for
reasons other than competency.
And this might be a concern
because of the fundamental importance played by the ME
Medicines Classifications Committee and Public Health.
Ensuring proper classification of medicines
as the committee does, is crucial
for their safe and effective use.
Some should be sold over the counter while others due
to their nature or to be left to the use
of qualified physicians.
If this process is subverted even a little bit,
there may be undesirable consequences for public health.
For this reason, the Wellington Youth just project suggests
an additional layer of accountability and
or additional guidelines are inserted into the bill.
This could be in the form of a general requirement,
then an appointee must have relevant experience in fields
such as medicine, pharmacy, or medical research
or mandatory consultation with public bodies
before appointments.
While the previous requirements were perhaps too stringent,
the proposed standards, uh,
in this bill are perhaps too low.
Thank you.
Um, uh, for our secret submission, uh, we would like
to discuss the recognized regulatory authorities listed in
Section 22 A of the bill, uh,
used in the two-step verification process.
Um, the WCGP are concerned
that the bill does not state the criteria
through which these authorities were chosen,
nor is there a process for review of the suitability
of the recognized organizations
or a criteria triggering such review.
While the bill allows the minister to make rules
for verification through secondary legislation
so they can be refined to reflect changes in best
international practice, we feel as though there needs
to be something within the text of the bill itself, ensuring
that the regulatory authorities themselves are regularly
assessed and their standards upheld to the standards
of best international practice.
Our written submission mentions in particular the American
Food and Drug Administration, which is listed
as a recognized regulatory authority by the bill.
The submission details are concerns
with the FDA's placement on this list.
Most notably for the reason that the FDA is currently headed
by RFK Junior, a health secretary who has been described
as a conspiracy theorist
and relevant to this bill has canceled
or frozen billions of dollars of research grants
for the development of medicines.
Clearly this bill will outlast RFK Union appointments.
However, this example illustrates the need for a process
to review the regulatory authorities in Section 22 A.
So when questions arise about a jurisdiction suitability
to be on the two step verification process,
these are able to be addressed.
We're not advocating for the FDA's complete removal from the
list as America is a leading, leading
and well developments of medicines on many fronts.
We're simply requesting the bill include measures
to ensure the public are able to trust both
of the regulatory authorities used in the two-step process
so that this fail safe can act as intended.
Um, KDA, that is our submission.
Mr. Chair, Dr. Veal,
Uh, thank you. Your points
about the recognition
of regulators are well made.
Uh, with respect to your first point about, uh, approval of
who is on the, uh, committee,
would you consider the delegation of that appointment power
to the director general of health, IE someone
who is not a politician, an adequate safeguard or
Yes, I would agree with you that
I would also agree with that.
I wouldn't want the minister to have no role,
but I think, you know, secondary consultation like
that would be in order.
Cam, did you have a question? No, you're good.
Often a sign of a good ion. Yeah.
Frank with you, I wouldn't view any other way.
Thank you for taking the time
to come here and present with us.
Got it. Pretty clear.
Very good.
Okay. We now have the Australia
and New Zealand College of Tists,
Kiata Kiata.
Steven Hector, very good to have you here. Thank you.
Nice to be here. We have 10 minutes
with you. I'll hand that to you now.
Thank you. Um, uh, KDA Koto.
Um, I'm Dr. Graham Roper.
I'm a a specialist anesthetist
and I'm chair of, um, the, um, New Zealand branch
of the Australian New Zealand College of Anesthetists.
Um, and I work, uh, rural and remotely in New Zealand.
Gerda. My name's, um, Dr. Rachel Dempsey.
I'm also a specialist anesthetist here in Wellington.
Deputy of the committee, um, for the College
of Anus, New Zealand.
College of Anesti is one of the, um,
largest specialist medical colleges
in Australia, New Zealand.
And it's responsible for the training, assessing
and setting the standards for specialist inus
and pain medicine specialists, um,
across Australia and New Zealand.
Um, as a college, we support the purpose of the bill, uh,
which is to improve access to medicines.
But in the context of, uh, regulation
and regulatory systems as a whole, there are some aspects
of the changes that do cause us concern.
Um, because of the potential risk of public safety, um,
there are things that can go wrong with, um, medications,
um, that do come onto the market.
Um, they can lack effectiveness, um,
they can be contaminated.
And we've had examples of these sorts
of events despite the good regulation that's been
around assessing them.
Um, the Medicines Act is one of a suite of, uh,
legislative and regulatory controls, which is unique
to New Zealand and they're there
to protect the public safety.
And also, I should add the, the clinician safety as well.
It's important that the bill works
with the other legislation, uh, and regulation.
There are three areas that we will address, um,
in our submission today.
Um, the new medicines verification pathway, the changes
to prescribing under Section 29
and changes to the composition
of the medicines classification committee.
I'll talk in first to the new, uh, verifications pathway.
Um, although it's not clear
that the new pathway can address the many issues that,
um, add up to a relatively slow Regi registration process
of new medicines in New Zealand, we can see
that there may be some advantages in fast tracking, um,
the approval process for medicines
that have already been approved in comparable countries
and aligning some of those processes
with international best practice.
However, it is important to take into consideration
that the population, the resources, the systems
that are within a country that has
previously registered a ME medication
and, um, recognize that decisions are not always
transferable, um, across countries.
We need to make sure that there is a robust processes around
decisions to make, uh, sure that things are transparent,
there's good evidence base behind them.
Um, it's insulated from, from influences such as, uh,
political industry, um, public pressures, um, particularly
as we give, um, uh, permission to unrestricted direct
to consumer advertising.
Um, it's also essential
to retain the specific requirements in section 21 2
around the safety and the efficacy of medicines.
Um, in the application for registration.
That seems to have been admitted in clause six.
Um, anesthesia
and pain medicine are,
are really intimately linked with safety.
Um, and um, as anesthetist we see firsthand the,
um, the effects
of medications We're in the unique position whereby we are
both the prescriber
and the person administering the medication.
And the medications we use have a fairly
instantaneous effect.
And we have examples of whereby, again, despite
good oversight, there has been poor efficacy
or a lack of effect from medication
or adverse events such as allergic,
severe allergic
reactions. I'll turn over to Rachel
Just to talk about the, um, expanded, um,
prescriber um, process.
We do think that with the HVCA act
that responsible authorities do set, um, standards
of education, training, qualifications
and what practitioners health practitioners are able to do.
And so we support that there should be an ability for them
to be able to prescribe
and administer, um, alternatively alternative medications.
And as in clause 12,
provided that as within the scope of practice
that has been set for that health practitioner.
With regard to the section 29 medications,
I realize this is probably different in other specialties
where they're talking about complicated cancer medications.
We use section 29 medications almost daily.
Um, we have lots of issues with supply chain issues
for drugs that enable us to do our job safely.
They're routinely used medications
for things like blood pressure
and often, um, that the supply chain means that we go
to an alternative brand that is under, um, section 29.
It's very hard if you look up to try
and find what, what's on section 29 at the moment.
I did a look the other day
and could not find what the current list
of what's on section 29,
but some of these are routine drugs used daily.
We wouldn't be able to do our jobs safely with those.
So perhaps while I realize
that there are other medications out there that do require,
um, a very high level
because they're, um, maybe cancer therapy, drugs
and other things, um, some of the ones we use are critical
for our job and an issue with supply chains, um,
it's absolutely essential
that we have, uh, good access to these.
Having said that, we do need to be assured
that whatever we pull out of our, um, cabinet there is safe,
um, and comparable to what the, um, the ideal medication
that we'll be using would be.
So perhaps there needs to be a different,
an alternative mechanism for the routinely used medications,
um, uh,
approval rather than newer medications. Perfect.
Thank you. Um, for your submission,
and I'm sure my colleagues will have more specific questions
on this bill,
but I want pick up on something you spoke about,
which was trust and transparency.
And I've been speaking with other colleges in the medical
sector who have got concerns about the level of consultation
and the increasingly targeted consultation, which I think,
um, does provide a context
for then seeing Bill like this be developed.
And I just wondered if you had any commentary
on the direction of travel.
Um, I guess my first comment is that if, uh, you know, one
of the main aims of the bill is to improve access
to medications for our community.
And, and I guess I see firsthand where I live at work
that there are many things that prevent access
and some of them are not simply having a
medication on a list.
Um, and so I think, um, one aspect about um,
being able to improve access is, is outside
of what the bill's trying to do.
I think there are other things, but it's very tempting
to look at an area such as Australia
and see that there are a broad range of medicines available
for certain, um, you know, for certain conditions.
But it doesn't actually mean that all
of those are better than what we've currently got.
Um, and there there really needs to be, um,
a good oversight
and a good understanding of
whether those medications are effective, are useful,
are they better than what we've currently got.
Um, and I guess that speaks to the transparency being able
to have a system whereby there is trust in the review
and the understanding of those, those medications.
And I think that comes down to the, um, ensuring that the,
the, the third piece of our submission about ensuring
that the medicine classifications committee
has good representation that's relevant very much.
Excellent. Thank you. And I, I note
that generally your support of, of,
of the bill you mentioned in your oral submission
that some things aren't transferable between jurisdictions.
Do you have any examples of any medications which, um, want
to be transferable between different jurisdictions
and what would make New Zealand different
to the other other jurisdictions?
Yeah, there's, there's quite a, um, uh,
an interesting historic example of whereby a, um,
a very potent pain relief medication was, um, studied
and assessed in an area in the United States.
And it was a dose finding study.
So it was about figuring out how much should you give
to someone to have an effect.
And they came up with a number and,
and settled on this number.
What wasn't transferable though was the nature of
that community where the study happened in.
And if you took that dose range
and gave it to another, um, another community,
another country, you might well not give
enough to a lot of people.
Um, so there are examples of, of where things are looked at
and they're not immediately transferable.
So, so when you say historical, what sort of timeframe
and is that a reflection has,
have those jurisdictions actually moved ahead if
that is an historic example?
Oh yes. Yes. And I think that's the advantage of having,
um, representation on a review committee that can look at
that study, understand the science behind it, where some
of the flaws might be,
and then make a decision about whether it is transferable.
Uh, Asha Thank you. Can I clarify?
You are opposed to the change to section 29
that would allow nurse practitioners to, um,
prescribe medicines using Section 29, uh,
unless they're low risk medicines
and you've suggested some ways in which they
could be identified.
So after you clarify that, I'd just ask you to comment
what is it, um, nurses,
nurse practitioners already prescribe, uh, what other,
what are you concerned about that the other checks
and balances in the system?
Their scope of practice, their training are insufficient
for them to, um, also, uh,
do section 29 descriptions.
So I think we'd be happy if we, we,
and again, within that scope of practice
and with, um, low risk medications, um, a lot of the ones,
um, I guess it's just,
the problem is it's such a broad section.
29 is such a broad, wide ranging, um, list of medications
and it seems to be constantly changing as well.
Um, I guess it's that responsibility, um, to fall on them
for keeping up in check what's normal, what's safe,
who's decided, whether that's low risk,
who's decided whether that's safe,
having some oversight for that.
Um, supplementary, if I may,
and please correct me if in your experience this is
different, but I understood nurse
prescribers would be within a particular field,
so they may very well be prescribing some chemotherapy,
um, medicines as part of, uh, their work within a team.
Uh, however, if they were section 29, there'd be one
or two that they would be very familiar with.
Do you think that is an unsafe situation?
I think that we don't work closely
with nurse practitioners.
Probably ma maybe in pain medicine would be the most common,
um, time that we, it's a bit hard for me
to comment on things like chemotherapy regimes
'cause it's not a field that I particularly work in.
Um, but just from looking at the lists of, um, section 29,
the, the range is so broad and the risk is so, um, wide.
The ones we use personally are quite routine switches.
Um, we don't have any particular concerns
around using alternatives for a lot
of the medications we use.
Um, but I can't sort of talk for
Thank you. Chemotherapy.
Thank you.
We're, we're over time,
but I wanna say thank you for coming in
and presenting to the committee today.
Appreciate it. Sure, thank you.
Next we have the, uh, New Zealand.
Oh, we might have a little buffer here.
That's Steve, Steve, Steven,
uh, we don indeed.
Sorry, that's where the issue was. Um, sorry.
We had Steven Hectares who was here today. Thank you Steven.
Sorry, I misread that under the previous script.
Hello, Tina Coto morning.
My name is Steven
and I am here to make a submission
on the medicines amendment.
Bill Edison is a complicated subject,
so I'll keep my submission brief.
I have been a patient under the mental health service
for 19 years, and these are my feelings about prescription
medicine and their availability.
I believe there are too many varieties
of prescription medication being used
to treat the same disorder.
I believe the amount of medicines being used
to treat mental health conditions could be cut
and make funding available for other things.
As a consumer, it is overwhelming the amount
of different drugs available to treat my disorder
all aspiring to the same goal,
and that's to keep me stable, stable.
However, I have had medication regimes changed several times
and I've resumed with the same cognitive state of mind.
It is time to cull the amount of medicine available
to consumers as they're all designed to do the same thing.
Keep the patient outta hospital.
Psychiatrists understand cognitive neuro functioning
and are well versed in prescribing medicine.
That in theory could affect the patient success
that would affect the patient successful.
However, in practice, the same medication can be used
to do the same thing across the board.
In terms of availability,
I have never had any problems acquiring medicine as it
as it has always been encouraged.
Patients, however, need
to use it more holistic approach in their recovery
and not be put themself in a position
where emergency pring is necessary.
I've been in this position
and a thankful ambulances are sometimes able
to prescribe asthma and anti-psychotic medication.
This is a great step forward for consumers.
In summary, regular audits are needed
to maintain current consumer population are accounted for.
And more and more the need to delete
or stop buying so many variety
of the same product is necessary now making noi.
Thank you Kiara. We have a question member there.
Yeah. Thank you for your submission. Thank you.
It's always good to hear from people with lived experience.
I take it from the comments that you
made about the ambulance.
Um, yes. People with the asthma
and antipsychotics that you would be supportive of those,
um, first responders having greater access
to emergency medications. Is that
Absolutely, it's, it's,
it's definitely a huge step forward
because historically there have been, uh,
ambulances haven't, ambulances haven't been able to continue
to, um, prescribe medicine that can treat you on the spot.
Mm-hmm. So it's, it's, it's a huge thing
that paramedics are actually able to help.
Can I ask one more question, Mr. Chair?
Just in terms of the agency that you feel over prescribing,
I hear that you talk about psychiatrists as being very, um,
knowledgeable and you've talked about a range
of medication being available
that sometimes could maybe feel overwhelming.
Do you feel that you are a collaborator in
your own treatment plan?
Um, what I actually think is
that patients should have more, uh,
control over their treatment plan
and perhaps should be given the authority
to choose the medications that they're gonna be,
um, treated with.
And that would probably give the patient a far better,
um, chance of recovery. True.
Yeah. Just to s on that, um, fa yours
and thank you very much for sharing.
Um, do you think that there's a gen a general lack
of health literacy for patients
who are receiving care and Absolutely.
When there's a bit of a smorgasbord on yeah.
Medications available that you're not sure how
to traverse the conversation with your practitioner?
I read the Mims quite frequently
and, um, you know, patients aren't really given the chance
to be inducted into medicine well enough.
They need to be educated more
to understand what's actually happening
and what the treatment is for and how it's gonna affect you.
Thank you, Steven. Thank you very much. Thank
All right. Uh,
The New Zealand Association of
Optometrist, have you here today.
Thank you. We've got you 10 minutes. Uh, Dr.
Leslie Fredrickson
and Hayden, apologies if
I've mispronounced your past.
No, thank you very much.
Uh, very thankful for the opportunity to, to speak.
Um, just to give a, a quick background as to
optometrists, just
because there can be some confusion as
to the, the landscape.
Um, optometrists fall between ophthalmology
as eye surgeons
and dispensing opticians,
which are providers of, of glasses.
Um, we see ourselves as the GPS for eyes.
It's our role to be provide community access for eyecare,
for screening of disease, for treatment of
low level non site threatening disease, to be a,
a gatekeeper for, um, the hospital system to manage
what we can in the community.
Um, optometry has had prescribing the medications
for 20 years now
and has been demonstrated to be safe with the use
of antibiotic steroids, anti-inflammatories, um,
and, um, all of that information is
and prescribing patents are audited, um, by our
regulatory board that patterns are fed back to, um,
US as part of our continuing education
and we've been demonstrated to be safe.
And if anything on the more conservative side of
of prescribing, um, the lack of access
to section 29 medication has been a barrier
to access for patients.
Um, in the past it has led to adverse outcomes.
Now we're pleased to see the update for
when interrupted supply happens
'cause that has led to, um, adverse outcomes in the past.
Um, but just to kind of give a, a broad,
um, categories of where we believe, um,
those section 29 medications help.
Um, there are indications, there was now submissions
of off label prescribing where new, um,
use of old medications has a, has different effects.
Um, and there's where existing medications
and much lower concentrations can have quite a different
therapeutic effect.
Um, and there are plenty of instances
where New Zealand has been too small a market, um,
and the just straight volumes of medications
that would be used here has been a barrier for companies to
apply and obtain medisafe approval.
And so medications have been available.
Yeah. Um, I think for me, having engaged with members,
um, over a considerable period of time, um, we find
that the, the expectation that's placed on optometrists,
even from ophthalmologists is that, um,
they can provide an an excellent level of, of service and,
and I think Hayden understates the, um, the scope
and that they can actually treat relatively
serious conditions.
But where the off-label bit comes in,
not the replacement thing, is that if someone is,
has traveled to a hospital, perhaps say on the west coast,
gone through to see an ophthalmologist
or a specialist in Christchurch
and they need a repeat prescription,
but they also need to be monitored, then the continuation
of the off-label medication would become problematic.
And I think that we are all aware that the eye departments,
the hospital eye services are really in high demand
that there's long waiting lists.
And so we think that, uh, including along
with the nurse practitioners
and the, um, medic, you know,
GPS medicines, medical practitioners,
that optometrists certainly have a need to be included in
that exemption in the section 29 just simply
for the practicality of serving the patients in their
communities should any particular need for that off-label,
um, prescribing to happen.
And I think he's absolutely right.
They've been conservative, they work closely
with the ophthalmologist
and we hear from our hospital optometrists
that the ophthalmologists assume that they can do this.
And so even in the hospital it's causing problems
because the ophthalmologist thinks
that the optometrists able
to prescribe under section 29, then they can't.
So this is flurry to try
and find someone who can, which just adds more
to the times and the delays.
And so I think it's a pragmatic, um,
request that we're making.
And, um, I think Hayden can speak
to some particular medications
and with more knowledge than I've got.
Thank you very much. Do members have
questions that I'd like to put forward?
Just a general quick ones.
Could you, um, obviously hundreds of
opticians around the country, would you
recommend the senior ones or, or,
or generally, you know, I was gonna say the, the, the,
it's, the truth is they graduate ready to prescribe.
They've already done the glaucomas and everything.
They're probably better,
the graduates are better trained than probably the people
nearing the end of their career.
So maybe you'd wanna put an age limit on it. I dunno. Oh,
We're not ageist, But a, a person
who is prescribing, um, within their scope.
And if they're not comfortable managing a particular
condition, then there is normally colleagues
that people can be transferred to in,
in the community anyway.
So I think it's a matter of, um, all optometrists
with their therapeutic, um, endorsement.
Um, and if they have a glaucoma endorsement, then, then
that would exclude non glaucoma, um, people.
So I think, yeah, you could probably go add more to that
Current specific medications
that are a barrier at the moment that should the law change
that optometrists would be able to prescribe tomorrow.
Uh, for allergic eye disease, dry eye disease prevention
of shortsightedness, they're all low site risk,
long-term chronic conditions
that are best managed in the community
that they just don't meet the threshold or hospital
or private ophthalmology care.
Um, so from that it's,
it's a very safe long term usage.
The only thing if I may just add is
that we were approached, um, by the regulatory authority,
um, who'd been asked whether they would be open
to developing a scope for injecting, um,
for optometrists to help relieve the, um,
pressure on the Avastin injections for, um,
age related macular degeneration,
which is almost like an epidemic, um, now.
Mm-hmm. And people are waiting way too long
for their repeat prescriptions.
There may be other, um, medications that are coming along
that may have a longer time span between the, the repeats.
But, um, the big regulatory problem there is
that Avastin being used here universally for treating
a MD is of used off label.
Right. So even though the optometrists know all the
structures of the eye that are capable of sitting down
and being, you know, I mean, it's not a, a big leap to do
that as opposed to just, um, reviewing it then, um,
that would be a, a huge advantage to the country
and to people with, with site threatening disease
if they were able to do that.
Thank you. Thank you.
Please correct me if I'm wrong,
but Avastin is the first line treatment
for age related macular degeneration.
Mm-hmm. So it's off-label because, not
because it's, um, supply chain disruption issue, but just
because this epidemic
that you described is still not worth a drug
company's while bringing a medicine? No,
It, it's all from April.
'cause it was primarily designed for bowel cancer treatment.
Lucentis was the medication designed specifically for eyes,
but costs 10 times as much.
And so Avastin has been shown to have the same efficacy, but
because there's an off-label,
it's a significant saving to that system.
And so it's been used in that regard.
Yeah. It's like tens of dollars as opposed to hundreds
of dollars for every injection.
Yeah. Interesting. Thank you. Good submission.
Thank you very much.
Okay, Next up we have the New Zealand
Outdoors and Freedom Party.
Sue,
Thank you.
You have you for 10 minutes.
Sue, you may leave us time for questions if you want.
I'll hand that time to you now.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for the opportunity from all of you to present today.
The New Zealand Outdoors
and Freedom Party is strongly of the view
that there must be more accountability in New Zealand
for the rollout of medicines, not less accountability.
And that is the crux of our submission.
What has happened over the last five years
or so, in particular since I've been studying many
of these issues and my background is in biochemistry,
microbiology, public health and law,
and I'm also leader of the
New Zealand Outdoor and Freedom Party.
So I've got a very wide background.
I've been studying the COVID response
and a lot of other prior responses.
I've just come across from the Court of Appeal
watching the fluoride appeal where the crown is arguing
that the Bill of Rights doesn't matter
and the findings of the US Federal Court doesn't matter
that fluoride is a neurotoxin.
And that accordingly the New Zealand government is free
to make its own decision about putting a neurotoxin in our
public drinking water all around New Zealand.
So on the one hand, we've got them arguing
that they can do what they like.
On the other hand, we have a bill here
where basically our government would be more
differential to overseas interest.
But the problem in both cases is the lack of accountability
for the decision makers to the people of New Zealand.
So if you're a family
with a toddler getting fluoride in your drinking water,
a neurotoxin that's going to reduce your child's iq,
you have no chance to have a say.
And equally with the Medicines Act, if,
if Zimbabwe in China approve a medicine under the proposed
legislation, our minister would be able
to approve the medicine in New Zealand
with without the Med Safe process,
which is sit out in the Medicines Act with the intention
of ensuring that all of the proper checks
and balances are done.
That may not be accurate.
That's my, well, I dunno, Zimbabwe to
four times two approved, sorry, or two approved countries.
Now we know, and I use the COVID experiment as an example
because it's a good example.
Back in March, 2020, the memorandum of understanding
between the Ministry of Health
and the Office of the Chief Coroner,
the 18th of March, 2020 at number
D, the New Zealand.
As of this date, New Zealand has confirmed 12 cases
of COVID and no deaths.
According to the director of public health,
COVID-19 does not have a particularly high mortality rate,
and it is not particularly transmissible.
So way back in March, 2020, the government established
that the risks were low.
Yet somehow we got hyped into this massive response
that pulled apart families pulled apart,
our economy pulled apart,
our trust in government pulled apart our trust in the police
because any of us who were out here in early February
protesting, um, witness considerable police violence.
So we, we've lost so much trust in government.
The last thing that you should be doing is removing further
trust in government by delegating decisions to a minister
who has no expertise.
Sometimes the minister may have some health expertise,
sometimes they have no expertise.
I think the current one has no training in, in public health
or health, and with no criteria apart from the fact
that two overseas countries have approved it.
So it's dangerous, dangerous legislation.
The what is happening also is
what I call a matrix of control.
So we have directions coming from the World Health
Organization who are heavily funded
by private pharmaceutical interests.
They are giving directions,
and I have the memorandum of understanding here
between the World Health Organization
and the International Association of Medical
Regulatory Authorities in R.
Now, interestingly enough, the chief executive
of the New Zealand Medical Council, Joan Simeon,
is also the chair of the International Association
of Medical Regulatory Authorities.
So we have this hierarchical system controlling
our health professionals.
A number of our different health professional organizations
are members of Im RA.
So, and part of this memorandum of understanding is
that an obligation to implement the policies
of the World Health Organization.
So if anyone's been wondering why on earth we got
to this crazy position of mandating New Zealanders
to use an experimental vaccine back in 2021, the answer is
because of the international agreements that we signed
that took away our sovereignty, it took away the control
of our parliament, our sovereign rights of our parliament
to make laws, and it took away our own body sovereignty,
our own right to refuse medical treatment
because of some hierarchical decision making.
And it's getting worse.
This matrix of control is expanding all of the time.
It takes five minutes on the internet to find all
of these different agreements about
how the World Health Organization controls not only our
regulators, our health regulators,
they control our science advisors.
There, there, there's tentacles everywhere.
And unfortunately, the people
of New Zealand are at the very bottom of the pile.
They don't even get a mention.
They don't get a look in because the decisions are made
before the decisions get to them.
So what I'm urging you to do, it's very easy
to just make these incremental changes.
They're convenience, somebody wants it.
What I'm urging you to do is actually stop the process.
We've got the COVID Commission of Inquiry part two,
looking at the vaccine injuries, 24,000 submissions
or a petition asking for an improper inquiry,
24,000 New Zealanders
who wanted an inquiry into vaccine injury
and 31,000 submitters into the part two of the,
of the COVID inquiry.
It's a massive problem.
It's a massive elephant in the room
that Parliament has been looking the other way at.
What I'm urging you to do is say, actually,
we are big boys and girls.
We are willing to stop
and have a look at what we are signing away
for New Zealanders and take back control for our people.
If we can sign up to the World Health Organization,
we can unsign.
If we can listen to one advisor, we can actually listen
to an array of views and get good advice.
But the idea that we are just gonna be channeled down this
funnel and there's nobody left who can actually say, yes,
I'm responsible for this decision.
I taught my kids when they were little that I did it
because he told me to is not an excuse.
And yet that is exactly what all this legislation is doing.
I did it because the World Health Organization
or some other hierarchy told me to.
That is not what we elect.
That's not what we have de um, democratic elections for.
We have it so that the people have control, so
that we have representatives who represent the people
and who can stand up
and be accountable for decisions they make.
If they make a mistake, they say, I'm sorry
they correct the course of things.
We don't just get a bigger
and bigger snowball of things going out of control,
creating more and more problems.
So there's so much documentation available.
Now, I've only put a very brief summary in my submission,
but I'm very happy to pass you copies
of the membrane understanding if you haven't seen it,
of the, the World Health
and the, um, I am r understanding the coroner's
memorandum of Understanding.
It's all there from government sources and black and white,
but nobody is reading it
and nobody's telling the public why
these decisions are being made.
And I'm pretty sure when you became mps it was
because you wanted to make a difference, not
because you just wanted to tick boxes.
So that's what I'm here for.
Outdoors and Freedom Party, we here for the people to ask
for accountability, to ask for different perspectives,
to be respected, to ask for our fundamental rights
and freedoms to be respected.
It's really concerning that a medicine will be able
to be signed off in New Zealand without the New Zealand
checks and balances
because two overseas organizations have done it.
And then potentially we've seen the mandates
before, once it's been signed off.
Next thing is, oh well it's
approved, so you've gotta have it.
There's no accountability in that process either.
So, and I have respect Aisha Vel,
and obviously you had a difficult job during COVID.
No personal criticism,
but we do need to actually take check of these things.
We do need to get to grips of what's good for New Zealand.
Please, I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you Ms. Gray. We have about a minute
left. Ingrid, Larry,
Thank you for your very passionate submission.
Um, you'll be aware that New Zealand first voted
for this bill, the first reading.
What would your message to New Zealand first be?
Thank you, Ingrid. Look, I, I think having things
before the public for a select committee inquiry is good.
Whether you agree or disagree, it's really important
that we have these important conversations.
But having got it before the house,
I think the reasons I've explained in my submission,
it's really important that we take back decision making
for New Zealanders and,
and steer away from international directions
or for all parties, not just New Zealand first
and can thank you to New Zealand first
for promoting the Royal Commission
of it's hugely appreciated.
Excellent. Thank you sir. Thank you. Here today.
Sorry, I've just been at the dentist,
so I feel like I'm not talking properly.
Oh, I normally go faster than that.
Thank. Thanks.
All right. Next up we have
the Clinical Advisory Pharmacists Association, CAPA
with Penny Clark, the chair,
and Dr. Linda Bryant, the previous chair.
Fair. Thank you. Good Morning. Good
Morning. Have you
here, here for 10 minutes.
Thank you very much. You Can leave us time
for questions if you want, but I'll hand that time
to you now. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Good morning.
My name is Penny Clark
and I'm the chair of the Clinical Advisory Pharmacist
Association or capa.
And with me is Dr. Linda Bryant,
who is the immediate past chair of our association.
We are both pharmacists, prescribers,
and we work in general practice.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak
to our submission on the medicines amendment bill.
We would like to briefly explain the background
to our submission and also welcome questions
because we represent a new type of clinician,
and understandably, there is a lack of knowledge
and awareness of the unique value added input
and uniqueness of our role.
We requested the opportunity to speak to our submission.
Peppa is a professional association of pharmacists
with postgraduate qualifications who mainly work
as clinical pharmacists
and pharmacists prescribers in primary care.
This is a different branch of pharmacist practice,
which currently represents about 5%
of the pharmacist workforce and it's rapidly growing.
CAPA also represents the pharmacist prescribers in both
general practice and secondary care.
And it's on their behalf that we are here today.
Pharmacist prescribers are highly skilled clinicians
with substantive training in applied pharmacotherapy,
pharmacist prescriber as a different scope of practice,
which is a very akin
to the nurse practitioner being a different scope
of practice from the, from registered nurses.
Pharmacists describe as bring an additional skillset
and expertise in pharmacotherapy
to their practice environment for the betterment
of both patient outcomes and also the clinical team.
The journey to become a pharmacist subscriber includes a
minimum of seven to eight years
of university study plus clinical experience in a clinical
setting such as a dental practice or a hospital.
There's now a hundred registered pharmacist subscribers in
New Zealand where the further 43 students due
to complete these studies at either Auckland
or at Target University.
At the end of this year, the number of pharmacists,
prescribers is growing exponentially in primary care.
The majority of pharmacists,
prescribers work in general practice in secondary care.
Pharmacists, prescribers work in specialized care clinics
such as cardiology, renal oncology, infectious diseases,
or an area like the ed.
Gps refer patients to us in primary care with a variety
of mostly complex and chronic medical conditions.
We assess them, we prescribe to optimize
and manage their medical conditions.
This includes initiation and medicines.
We also answer numerous questions about cases
and in doing depth reviews
of new medications, read the bill.
We'd like to express our thanks
for your work on the medicines amendment bill,
which we are largely in agreement with.
And thank you for removing the restrictions
for all prescribers on prescribing section 29 medicines
that are temporary substitutes due to Ava, uh,
unavailability of a New Zealand
registered brand of the medicine.
This is hugely enabling.
We do ask though that the committee considers including
pharmacists, prescribers along with nurse practitioners
for full prescribing rights to section 29 medicines.
We can understand that
as designated prescribers in the current legislation,
having a list
of GED medicines we can prescribe from is a barrier
to prescribing section 29 medicines at present.
However, the systems under review with the Ministry
of Health with a a view to move to ga categories
of medicines rather than lists of medicine names,
which will future proof the list
because it very quickly goes out of date,
as I'm sure you can see.
And also removes any barriers
to us prescribing Section 29 medicines.
Should the bill be amended amending the medicines amendment
bill to include pharmac subscribers
to prescribing section 29 to, to
initiate section 29 medicines
and prescribe all section 29 medicines would be future
proofing the amendment.
The rationale for pharmacists describe as being appropriate
to prescribe Section 29 medicines is our extensive
postgraduate qualifications, our knowledge
and understanding of pharmacotherapy,
our clinical experience, and our collaborative roles.
As such, our list of medicines is extensive,
nearly 1800 medicines
and it's intended to include most medicines.
The problem is it goes outta date very quickly.
This differs from other non-medical prescribers.
We are referred to by gps, nurse practitioners
and specialists for advice around these and any other new
or unusual medicines
or in patients with complexity
of medical conditions or medicines.
The restriction on section 29 medicine prescribing,
therefore seems unnecessarily legislative in our submission.
We've included case studies
that were gathered from our pharmacist prescribers
to give you a snapshot of our, the variability
of our practice and the barriers
that patients face in accessing medications
and the impact on patients when they can't get an
appropriate medication because we are
unable to prescribe it.
Mm-hmm. And also the unintended impact on our busy clinical
team and the restriction this results.
And we welcome the opportunity to answer any questions
or for any further discussion.
Thank you. Excellent, Dr.
Yeah. Thank, thank you.
Um, what other your, your submission's very good
and you mentioned the diverse range of situations that your,
um, members are working, um, working in highly trained in.
I think one of the difficult challenges
for the committee is, you know, how do,
how do we know this is safe to increase the scope
of section 29 prescribing?
So can you help us understand what the other protections
that would be around, um, a pharmacist prescriber would be,
you've mentioned the training training,
but how is the scope of practice defined?
Uh, do, are they all working in the community?
What if it was a, um, another submitters raised the issue
of chemotherapy drugs being highly specialized.
Is that the sort of area you'd be working in?
Help us understand what the risk is
so we can decide if this is safe.
I think the, um, the risk is managed
by the work conditions
and that we work in a clinical team with, with, um,
with doctors specialists if you're looking
at things like chemotherapy.
Um, so we are, we are not working alone.
We are not working from a community pharmacy.
It's very important to make that distinction.
So for a pharmacist prescriber who's working in oncology,
for example, uh, there are already pharmacist prescribers
who are managing chemotherapy, um, regime
and prescribing chemotherapy drugs.
It's very common overseas.
One of our pharmacist prescribers has had 10 years,
over 10 years extensive,
extensive experience in ITU in the UK
before coming to New Zealand
and was prescribing a, a variety of inotropes
and specialized medications.
That's very different from my practice
as a pharmacist prescriber in general practice.
So I think part of our training is around realizing our, uh,
like with any prescriber, we are realizing, um,
working within our area of practice.
So the scope is pharmacist prescriber,
the area is the area of prescribing.
And just like for a medical doctor, the scope would be, uh,
a medical qualification,
but a cardiologist wouldn't prescribe medications
that a GP wouldn't prescribe.
It's very similar with that.
And, and so someone who's a pharmacist prescriber,
their scope would be in chemotherapy, for example,
or in community.
Yes. So
Those are differentiated
and you're qualified in one of them.
The scope's the same, but the
area of practice is different.
So for someone to move areas of practice, they need
to do substantive training.
Okay. So we have had pharmacy prescribers move from the
hospital setting to general practice.
And it requires, um, it, it's a different role.
So it does require a lot of extensive training.
You can't just, we are just like, I could not go
and work in oncology tomorrow.
Yeah. Without sense of training. Mm-hmm.
I think you've kind of answered what I was going to ask
as a sub on that.
'cause I'm interested, you've got your specialists
that are based in hospital and on oncology for instance,
and then we've got our pharmacists in community.
Um, and wondering about, you know, what provision
or, um, mechanisms could be put in place where we are trying
to get as many of our workforce to work top of scale
as possible, particularly in this regime possible.
I think one of the issues that sort of comes with that,
you talked about community pharmacists.
Yeah. First of all, if we are doing pharmacist prescribers,
they have to be in a collaborative environment.
And I know they're trying to extend that,
but we work in general practice or in hospital,
and that's a different mindset and a different skillset
and a different environment.
And I think when we're working in
that collaborative environment, um, is quite different
to working in a community pharmacy.
So, um, and the skills required, yeah.
And if we look at the fact there's an extra 1800 hours
of postgraduate study required, um, at a minimum
and most have masters, I think we have to look, that sort
of takes us back as to the scope of pharmacist prescribers.
And at the moment that scope is quite
defined and quite different.
And under the ministry there should be no sort
of association perhaps
or ownership in terms of a community pharmacy
because of conflict of interest.
Yeah. And also when it comes to
prescribing these financial issues as well,
if you are doing dispensing and prescribing.
So I think right now there is a very clear distinction
and I know that sort of, as I said, a different mindset,
the different environment, different skillset required.
Thank you. In that.
The other thing I could perhaps just add to that and um,
and, and answer to your question in earlier Dr.
Vel, was that the, um, the medical council, the College
of gps wrote a very good submission the last time we had our
list, our gazetted list of medicines extended in support of
that saying that they could not think
of any reason why we basically couldn't have an open list.
So, uh, that's on file.
Um, and you know, searchable their submission and that
and their, their, one of the things that's been ratifying
to us is their, the backing
that we have from all our medical colleagues
and which the areas we work in. Thank you.
Thank you. We're at time. Thank you.
Appreciate you coming in today to perform time.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Oh, I just, one thing I surely leave here just
because there is a misunderstanding of, um,
the different branch of pharmacy we represent.
I have just left a diagram about complicated and complexity
And where We fit into that with the new branch that
We're promot side.
Thank you very much for your time. Thank
You.
Thank you. Thank you. All right.
Next up we have the Council
of Medical Colleges in New Zealand,
Kia and everyone, um, I'm Samantha, me, I am chair
of the Council of Medical Colleges and this is Kiara.
I'm Alex Matt, I'm the Executive director
of the Council of Medical Colleges.
Yeah. Thank you for the opportunity to talk today.
Um, just for a refresh of who we are, um, the Council
of Medical Colleges is, um, a coalition
of all the 18 colleges across the country.
Many of us are trans husbands,
so we are the small brother of the big brother.
And, um, we also set standards for training so
that the people who qualify from um, programs actually, um,
can prescribe really well,
but also, uh, safe have, um, real safety monitoring
for their patients and do the right thing for the patients.
So, um, we are very much about standard setting
and about education and we don't decide who gets jobs.
We, we decide how skilled you are to do the job.
So, um, in relation to the bill,
we have put in a few things just now submission,
but the three areas that are really critical to us as all
of the colleges, one is about the verification pathway
and making sure that that is safe.
We think that a speedier way of doing it is a good thing,
but also we need to make sure that that is safe.
And there are many examples of where, um,
medica me medicines come out into the market and cause harm
and the harm is not found until well down the track.
And an example of that is Rol,
which was an asthma medication.
It's still used today,
but when it was used in isolation, it killed people.
And when it's used in combination, it's um, safe.
So it's just a matter of how do we make sure
that if we have an expedited verification pathway,
that it is safe and
that we are monitoring in a active way rather than the
current passive way of monitoring, which is
what we have today.
So I would suggest that, um,
and we would all suggest that there is some active
monitoring goes on if we are using a faster track pathway.
Section 29 is, um, there's good parts
and cautionary tales for section 29.
Some medications in Section 29 are really, um,
complex medications for significant diseases.
And there are many of us in medicine
who wouldn't be necessarily prescribing those medications
unless we are well-trained
and versed in what they're used for.
And we think a blanket, um, opening of section 29
may not be wise in that we, you do need extra training
for some of those medicines.
So looking at, um, what ANCA has suggested,
which is there are some high, uh,
risk medications in section 29
that would be corralled into a separate way of prescribing,
whereas there are low risk replacement medications,
which we think if someone has trained in, um,
prescribing in a generalist scope
or generalist level are perfectly fine to be broadened,
to be able to be prescribed
by anyone who's trained in prescribing.
And then the, uh, third part is about the makeup
of the committee at the moment.
Um, we recognize
that New Zealand Medical Association has disappeared, so,
um, having them in the bill is, um,
not valid anymore.
However, we do think
that having clinical people in the committee is super
important because if you are getting wisdom around how you,
um, prescribe and what medications you want to change
or systems that you want to change in relation to medicine,
you do have need to have expertise
and people who are on the ground doing the job, knowing
what it's about, and know all the ins and outs
and the risks that are involved being involved in
that committee to make those wise decisions.
So our recommendation is that there is, um, of the seven
that's suggested, we think expanding it is a good idea,
but of seven, maybe having, um, two pharmaceutical
and two medical involved to make sure that we get
that clinical knowledge.
And, um, so for any committee, you know, you are only
as good as the information you're given.
So having that wisdom on the board would be really useful
or the on the committee would be really useful.
And I'm really happy to take questions.
I know this is quite short,
but I'm sure, um, there's some questions that you have
and, um, we'd like to be as supportive as we can
to change the medicines end.
Yeah.
Excellent. Thank you Dr. Carroll.
Uh, sorry, I think Ingrid had here.
Thank you. Um, I just want
to thank you for your submission.
Um, I'm picking up on the end of page one
and also the top of page two, um, about your concerns
about ministerial appointments.
And I note that the minister said there is analog
legislation that allows the same
and that the minister would normally act on the advice
of advisors and there would be clinical experience.
But I see your concern that you want that mandated,
and I've also spoken to a number of your members about, um,
what feels to them if I'm quoting them correctly,
to be a narrowing of consultation
and transparency around policy development
and bill development.
So I'm getting a sense of mistrust
and I note that you talk about the Health Practitioner's
Competence Assurance Act in a similar move.
And I I just wondered if you could give us a high level
perspective about your clinical concerns about the direction
of travel that, um, all of this seems to be taking.
Yeah, I think, um, it is about having
that clinical knowledge in the, in the room
and with the health practitioners, um, recent consultation
that was had, um,
the concern from them across the colleges was that the,
currently there are ministerial, um,
appointments onto medical council
and it seemed in the consultation document that that was not
shown to be the case and
therefore, um, we should have ministerial appointments,
which already existed.
So it was just that sort of like sense
that there something is happening,
but then we were changing it up to make it, um, uh,
we're suggesting it's not happening.
And I think that's where this distrust is, is probably, um,
come from in that, um, with the HPCA act from the Council
of Medical College's perspective,
we've been very proactive in trying to engage.
So we started engaging in August last year.
We've continued to engage as much as we ha can.
And when we asked to what was happening
and where we were going next, we got told
that there's a consultation
and that was the only way that we
were gonna be able to put input in.
And so that felt like we were trying our best to be involved
and we were not being encouraged to be involved.
Um, I think on this medicines we've been
with the previous iteration, there was a lot of work
that went into the therapeutics bill
and um, we felt that
that was really good information and support.
And then when it's all taken away
and re re-litigating again, it just feels that we, um,
that was what advice has not been listened to.
Yeah.
Question, uh, two questions if you don't mind, Mr. Chair.
Uh, firstly,
I know your comments about the Medic Medicines
Classification Committee are directed towards making sure
clinical expertise, uh, is represented.
I'd like to put to you that there are, um,
the decisions made by the committee, uh,
can influence commercial outcomes.
Do you have any concerns about any political appointees
being on the committee?
Because there is another option proposed to the committee
that that role can be delegated
the director general of health.
So that's what we're trying to weigh up with that question.
Yeah, I think, um, the
conflict of interest issues may be something that we'd have
to think about with a committee that if there is someone
who has got, um, vested interest in commercial concerns,
then you would be, um, thinking about how does that work.
I think industry, um, led information is useful,
I think also, but also the people on the ground
thinking about patient safety is really important as well.
And I think you need to strike a balance.
So it is how do you strike that balance while continuing
to make sure that the clinical information of
what actually is done on the day
with prescribing is heard by that committee.
And I think sometimes, like we've just said
with consultation,
sometimes you feel like your consultation is, um, may land,
but often it feels like it doesn't land. Mm-hmm.
And just, uh, for my one more,
your submission has made a point about, uh, uh, curbing
what the bill presently allows for section 29 prescriptions
for, um, nurse practitioners.
The committee has also heard from prescribing pharmacists
and optometrists today about their desires.
So this is a challenge for the committee to balance up
the out outside of this act.
Why do you view the other, um, protections
that are in place as inadequate?
So those professionals, uh, training scope of practice
and their work in a team setting?
Um, I think, um,
training is different across all different jurisdictions
as far as pharmaceutical training goes.
So, um, it's, it is varies depending on
where who you train under.
So medical training all through six years
and then specific to your specialty, um, uh,
will create training in medicine.
We can't change from one jurisdiction
to another without being retrained, completely retrained.
Um, and then the industry, um,
environment that you are in is also, um, can help
and in what you are able to prescribe,
but then there are certain environments
where you can be in quite isolation
and independence doesn't mean isolation.
So often with, um,
there are places like if you're in a rural community in
general practice, you may be very isolated.
Mm. And as a prescriber who may not have that full gamut
of training or is moved from one jurisdiction to another,
how do you get that support
and team around you on a day-to-day basis when you're seeing
a patient every 15 minutes?
I think the other side of it is, um, in the team, yes,
the team is really helpful and supportive
and a lot of our colleagues do spend a lot
of time supporting nurse prescribers in their practices
and nurse practitioners growing into nurse into prescribing.
And that's really helpful, but there is actually no support
for the trainers to do that.
So the more volume of prescribers
that you have in your community and
or in your team setting, there is more burden on the
supervision requirements that go on with that.
And if you're expanding section 29 to be more complex,
um, difficult medications that you'll be prescribing,
then you are putting more onus on the
supervisory component of that.
So those are just considerations you need to think
About. Thank you. Thank you.
No, we are at time. Okay.
Thanks very much. Thanks for coming in today. Thank you.
Excellent. We now have, uh, St.
John joining us today for 10. Good morning to have you here.
Thank you. Good morning. My name is Dr.
Tony Smith and I'm one of the Deputy clinical directors
for Hati St.
John here in New Zealand. And the issue that I'd like
to bring to your attention today is that
of future proofing the ability of ambulance personnel
to be able to administer medicines to patients in emergency
and urgent situations in the face
of a supply chain disruption to that medicine.
Just to give you some background,
our ambulance personnel will treat
and transport about half a million New Zealanders per year.
They administer medicines to patients using
clinical practice guidelines, which are a form
of a standing order.
A standing order is a set
of written instructions from a registered medical
practitioner to allow medicines to be administered,
for example, by ambulance personnel.
And our clinical practice guidelines are, um, are sent to
five ambulance services across New Zealand by one group
of medical practitioners, of which I am one.
We are increasingly facing supply chain disruptions
to key medicines required in eem in emergencies.
And in the past we might experience a supply chain
disruption once every few years.
It's now common for us to have two medicines at any one time
with a supply chain disruption.
And that often means that the only alternative is a section
29 medicine
and the current legislation
that section 29 medicines cannot be administered
under a standing order.
And this is putting our patients at risk, my plea
to the committee or our plea because
although this I'm here from Han St.
John, this is an issue
that all emergency ambulance service providers face, is
that in the future we need the ability to be able
to administer a Section 29 medicine
by our ambulance personnel under
our clinical practice guidelines.
And I'm happy to take questions. Thank you. You
Clear? Thank you.
I mean, it's pretty clear message. Clear.
Yeah. Can
Did you have an opportunity to raise this
with the Ministry of Health before the bill was drafted?
Yes. And why did they
That's a, that's an excellent question
Done, Janet,
can you, uh, committee what the supply chain issues that
used to have, what's changed and what do they look like now?
Um, increasingly medicines are often now produced in one
place in the world, and that's happened over a period
of time as competition for medicines has got, um, bigger
and bigger and, and margins have got less and less.
And now it often takes something simple like a,
like a storm in an area, um, in that one factory
and then a medicine, for example, adrenaline
may suddenly be in short supply.
Um, and an adrenaline is an example of a medicine
that last year we came very close to running out of.
And so it is increasingly common across the world
for supply chain disruptions, for key medicines
to become a real issue for us.
So adrenaline, any what else?
Yep, Petro and asthma.
So it's a, it's a medicine used in asthma
but also chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, uh,
which is an emergency medicine.
We actually ran out of that last year
and we're no longer carrying it
and our staff couldn't administer it.
Um, ketamine, which is a medicine which is used
for analgesia for patients for example,
have got multiple injuries following a car crash.
We are this close to running out of ketamine at the moment.
We have a section 29 alternative,
but at the moment our staff cannot legally use it.
But that section 29 alternative is safe and it's available,
but it's a legislative barrier that we can't use it.
Ruhana. Yeah. Thanks for sharing the legislative barrier,
um, to, uh, and others.
Um, we had earlier, uh, submit a, um,
providing patient voice around like these
psychotics out in the field
and stuff like that, you know, um, the way
with which these blockages do prevent, um,
you from administering medications.
Do you have any feedback on
what you are seeing all the time out
in the field on these matters?
Well, I think we, we are definitely seeing a growing trend
of supply chain disruptions
and we are definitely seeing that starting
to have an impact on our patients.
Mm. And and it's always a balance of risk
because on one hand you don't want to be administering a,
an unapproved medicine that may carry a risk
to the patients, but there's also a significant risk in not
having an emergency medicine available at
all to our patients.
And we think the best people to balance
that risk is the medical directors
who currently across the country issue those standing orders
to ambulance personnel.
Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Yep.
Top list. Okay.
Do we have, um, here?
Yes. Mina,
Willam Ram. Thank you.
That's a Dutch thing. Your official name has a long name
and your calling name is Helma,
but I can't put it on official paper
because I don't listen to Willam.
Great to have you here. Thank you.
We've got you here for, um, five minutes
and that two now. Thank you.
My worry with this bill is,
is a big pharma sellout medicine will be automatically
approved if two other countries have also approved it.
It's, in my opinion, if this bill goes through,
the big pharmaceutical companies will not have
to use guidelines with inclusive FDA
and the CDC as New Zealand has always done, the people
of New Zealand are not aware that the quality
of their medicine can change drastically.
While I was researching this bill,
I stumbled upon the article from from Scoop,
which was released on the 15th of April, 2025.
What I was reading in this article made me
even more concerned.
This bill would enable more flexible approach
to prescription and administration of medicine.
This bill allows pharmacists, prescribers,
nurse practitioners, midwife, dieticians, optometrists
to prescribe medicine within the scope of practice.
This worries me as a pro-life person
when it concerns the abortion tablets,
Milone and Miller Meso ol.
I strongly believe that those tablet should not be given
without supervision of an obstetrician.
Only an obstetrician can diagnose an atopic pregnancy.
Taking the abortion pill while having an atopic pregnancy
can be dangerous and lead to complications
like potential ruptures.
Also, if woman take the abortion tablet later in
pregnancies, it can lead to infection
and toxic shock with the potential of uterine ruptures
and impacts on fertility experience.
A medical abortion, especially late in pregnancy,
can be emotionally challenging as well.
We need some safeguards in this bill for lawful prescribing
of the abortion tablets.
A special pharmacist, a midwife,
or a prescriber who are not equipped to deal
with those complications in New Zealand.
An estimate of 2,247 deaths are due
to medication errors.
We do not want this to increase.
Since the 11th July, 2024, the Ministry of Health
has had published a statement on a PR
abortion pill reversal.
This this said it is unsafe, which is not proven.
It has a 62% success rate.
The chemical used is progesterone, which is also given
to mothers with a history of miscarriages
and bleeding in their early pregnancies.
It is not unsafe if it's prescribed correctly.
The woman in this scenario asked for API herself.
It's her choice, it's her body.
The real reason why this practice is discouraged is because,
because it's not FDA approved,
we do not know the effect on children with
where the mother took the first abortion pill,
Miller Britta Stone,
and then changed their mind into progesterone again.
It is the mother's choice to take this risk so far
good in the USA no, no side effects.
Fact noted. It is unfair.
I believe if you pass this bill, New Zealand will not,
will not be using the guidelines of FDA
and CDC approved medicine to use the excuse
that EPR is not FDA approved
and then to punish medical practitioners
with six months in prison and $20,000 fine is hypocritical.
If you reject the FDA guidelines,
this bill can lessen the quality of medicine
our citizen obtain.
If Med Savee does not consider FDA guidelines as part
of a broader international landscape of regularity
standards, do New Zealanders have to become used
to normalization of private health insurance,
which will in return provide good quality medicine?
Does our healthcare become more
and more like a balance sheet?
I hope that is not the case.
Thank you very much. We have time
for a question if there are any.
No, thank you very much for your submission today.
Alright. Um, next up we have to,
I have ah, feel, feel thank um,
joining us by, do we have them available?
We do. Thank
gi, we have uh, Margaret hand there.
Very good to have you here.
Sam Cher of the health committee.
We have members around the table.
Um, thank you for presenting us today.
We have you for 10 minutes.
If you wanna leave us time for quick,
I'll end that time to now. Thank you.
I've also got, um, Ryan Sunday here who's
also a nurse practitioner.
Excellent. Uh, R-Y-A-N-S-U-N,
GE nurse practitioner at the clinic as well.
So yeah, thank you very much for, um, allowing us
to participate in this today.
I know two minutes are very quick. Um,
um, nurse practitioner,
Um, I'm also, um, nurse practitioner, um,
at te feel, feel, um, yeah, I'm here to,
um, today with Margaret.
Yeah. Yeah.
So, uh, thank you for the submission that we, I put
through on behalf of the TE a few au,
which is a newly clinic nurse practitioner clinic in, um,
or, um,
and we've had the, um, the model
of care which looks at nurse practitioners predominantly,
um, with the support along the years that we've had them.
But, um, in terms
of nurse practitioners wanting section 29 per our practice,
it would also, um, remove inequities
and barriers that we have, especially if we don't, um,
have a gp, which we currently don't have a GP
as checked at the moment.
Um, that would consist with the, you know, the normal role
of making sure that the section 29 medications are
prescribed according to, uh, staff to practice.
Um, often we've got a specialist from the hospital
where we've asked to prescribed section 29 medications and
because we don't have a GP at this stage, we often will have
to ask, um, for another lo GP to come in and do that.
Um, unfortunately we've um, unable
to sustain a GP for this long
Mm-hmm.
With the patient at that time, knowing their history,
Knowing their Background.
Sorry, uh, it's, we're cutting in
and out a it here so I'm gonna ask
That video.
Um, Oh, sorry,
Sorry. We are losing,
losing you a little bit.
So I'm gonna ask our team, sorry to just have it on audio
and if you too can please just, um,
reduce yours to audio as well.
Thank you. Might help us clear up the quality.
I need to turn off there.
Can you please turn off your camera
and we'll just rely on the audio.
Oh dear.
Yeah. Excellent.
We've got, uh, some audio coming back.
Yeah, bad wifi and
It's quite tough.
What was that?
Good.
Tell them to hot spot off their cell phone.
Do have, have we lost them again? They off
Have we just call them? Do
We have a phone number We'll reschedule for next week.
Reschedule, that's what I'm hearing. All right.
We'll do that. Oh, oh,
do we have bio or?
Yeah, It's not you must be John Robson.
Very good to have you here.
Welcome John. Have Thank you. 10 minutes.
You can leave us time for questions if you want,
but I'll hand that time to you now. Yeah.
Great. Thank you. Uh, good afternoon.
Uh, members of the Health Select Committee.
Every year, nearly a hundred New Zealanders
with relapsed lymphoma faced limited options without access
to advanced CAR T-cell therapies, particularly in Maori
and rural communities.
My name is John Robson. I'm the managing director
of a company called Bio Oral Limited
and New Zealand Biotech company that is partnered
with Margan Institute of Medical Research.
We are seeking to commercialize a third generation CAR
T-cell therapy for diffuse diffuse large cell lymphoma.
And thank you for considering our support in this book.
Today I'm gonna highlight how these changes can ensure
equitable access to lifesaving therapies
for the more than 225 New Zealand patients
that suffer from diffuse large B-cell lymphoma each year.
And drawing on proven models from America
and Australia that are currently in use today.
Um, and providing the urgent need
to access CAR T-cell therapies.
We support doctor led prescribing, a nurse trained diagnosis
and delivery, prioritizing health delivery in rural
and Maori communities annually.
New Zealanders with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma face
limited options after relapse with 30 to 40%,
nearly a hundred patients no longer responding to R chop,
which is the standard chemotherapy regimen.
Our therapy is now 25% of the way through phase two trials,
and it reprograms immune cells to target cancer
offering hope to those people that have none.
Similar but older Generational therapies are available in
countries like the us but these therapies remain mostly
inaccessible to New Zealanders,
especially underserved communities that simply can't travel
and, uh, afford the cost of these high expensive treatments.
Currently, section 29 processes require doctors
to provide patient and medicine details,
which whilst necessary can contribute
to administrative tasks that may delay access
to unapproved medicines like ours,
particularly in rural communities,
these bills reforms inspired
by global case studies can bridge this gap ensuring
timely and equitable care.
We support the medicines amendment bill
reforms for three specific reasons.
Number one is enhancing efficiency in the Section 29
reporting processes by building on our existing
manufacturer's responsibilities for data management
and reporting to medisafe,
but reducing the administrative task for clinicians,
enabling greater focus on patient care.
Secondly, we support the modernization
of regulatory processes,
potentially facilitating the adoption of digital tools,
including AI models that optimize treatment protocols
and adverse event analysis
for more efficient data management by manufacturers such
as US improving patient outcomes.
And three, introducing a clearer verification pathway
to expedite the approval of medicines
that are previously authorized by
recognized overseas jurisdictions, improving access to safe
and effective treatments
that are already proven and used overseas.
We endorse these changes
and our new Christchurch manufacturing facility has been
specifically designed to optimize electronic systems
for data capture, supporting diverse populations,
including Maori
and Pacific patients, where data is not necessarily, um,
captured in any overseas trials.
We support doctor led prescribing due
to the therapy therapy's complexity,
but are committed to advancing nurse training in partnership
with the universities and clinical facilities
to accelerate diagnosis and treatment in rural areas.
Nurses play a very significant role in novel therapy
pathways, coordinating treatments,
monitoring adverse events,
and reducing delays in disadvantaged communities.
There are two global frameworks that validate this bill.
Number one in the US is the expanded access
program, the EAP.
The FDA's EAP enables physicians
to prescribe unapproved medicines
with manufacturers handling the reporting.
From 2016 to 2017, Novartis
provided KYRIA to nearly 500 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
and a LL patients pre-approval in 2023.
This had grown 1200 patients accessing these therapies
through EAP nurses at centers like MD Anderson support
outpatient delivery, improving access to non-local patients.
This model supports our plan
with doctors prescribing therapies,
but nurses coordinating care
and manufacturers like us managing the complex reporting
and data analysis work.
We're visiting MD Anderson next week in Houston,
and we're looking at their models for rural delivery
to see if we can adapt into New Zealand's unique
and smaller healthcare system.
Secondly, in Australia we have the special access
scheme, the sas.
The tga SAS allows doctors to prescribe unapproved medicines
with minimal reporting.
In 2018 and 2019, they prescribed 150 patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, Kim, Maria
and Yata pre-approval at centers like the
Peter Macallan Cancer Center.
Again, nurses coordinated the care for indigenous
and rural patients, and this reduced travel barriers
mirroring our plans for nurse training in rural,
disadvantaged, and Maori communities.
By adapting this model, we can overcome New Zealand's
geographic and equity challenges, ensuring local access
to these complex therapies.
These case studies demonstrate that doctor led prescribing,
nurse supported delivery
and manufacture reporting ensure safe, equitable access
for complex CAR T-cell therapies.
Guiding New Zealand's reforms
at phase two trial concludes in June, 2026,
creating a large gap until med safe approval
anticipated in 2027.
During this period between 70
and 94 patients who are end
of life could access our therapy under Section 29
as no alternative alternatives exist,
but without efficient processes, rural
and Maori patients will miss out deepening inequalities
of access to these um, lifesaving treatments,
the build reforms deliver three essential improvements,
timely access, rural equity, and safe delivery.
This verification pathway could expedite approval
enabling faster far act funding decisions
and improve affordability as proven globally.
This biller, we believe is a pivotal step towards equitable
cancer care, and we urge the committee
to endorse doctor led prescribing
with streamlined manufacturer led reporting,
potentially enhanced by digital tools as proven globally.
Support nurse training to accelerate rural diagnosis
and delivery, advancing Maori and Pacific equity,
and clarify the verification pathways guidelines
to expedite approvals and reduce the reliance on section 29.
In closing, we are primed
to support the acceleration of new,
Sorry.
Okay, sorry. Of new therapies for New Zealand,
ensuring equitable access
to life-saving treatments currently out of reach of many
inspired by the US EAP and Australian SAS.
Our vision is to make CAR T cell therapy accessible
to every New Zealander in need.
We thank you for championing health equality
and health equity through this legislation
and we look forward to partnering with you.
Thank, thank you very much Dr. Vero.
Can, can we just be clear
how you think this bill would help a
unique firm like yours?
Are you imagining that the verification pathway would allow
you to have your product approved by the FDA
and then available in New Zealand rather than the reverse?
And that would be advantageous for an,
from an export perspective for you?
Um, 100%, no.
Um, our approval pathway is explicitly
and directly through medisafe approval in
New Zealand is our number one goal.
We have no plans to register with the FDA
of this therapy at this time at all.
So you're just interested in this bill from a general
policy point that it's a good thing to do
or do you imagine, I I'm trying
to understand why the situation your company is in passing
this bill was helpful for you.
Yeah, so we're building a,
a unique manufacturing facility in New Zealand that can,
can handle one therapy for,
for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
The reality is there's multiple myeloma
and a number of cancers which we still can't
manufacture and treat in this country.
Having local manufacturing would enable us to in license
or already existing approved therapies from overseas
and have local manufacturing.
The challenge for those therapies, Kim, Maria
or Yescarta, is the price point
and the inpatient requirement in those hospitals.
If we can somehow construct a, a scenario
where we can manufacture locally at a lower price,
then we can access instead of those therapies
to New Zealanders without 'em having to travel.
That is the end game for us. Thank
You. K.
Thank you very much for your presentation.
Very good to have you here. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, and we have the New Zealand
companion animal specialists.
Excellent, excellent. Here. Fantastic.
We for 10 minutes. Uh, welcome. It must be Dr. Ryan Katon.
Yeah. Okay, great. Thank you.
Um, good afternoon your Ryan.
Thank you for taking the time to hear the submission.
It's gonna be possibly a little different from some
of the other ones you've heard today.
Um, so I'm presenting on behalf
of New Zealand Companion Animal Specialists, um,
called NZ cs.
Um, we're a not-profit organization just representing the
veterinary medical specialists, uh, in New Zealand.
Um, specialist first function in a very similar manner,
obviously with different species compared
to human medical specialists.
But I think it's also important to point out
that I think the submission is all equally important
to all the general practice vets out there as well.
Um, not just specialists.
Um, so the issue
for us is the current legislation does not allow
veterinarians to prescribe section 29 medications at all.
While there are some prescription animal remedies we can use
specifically for animals, uh, lots
of medications just don't exist in the veterinary sphere.
So we need to prescribe human medications when there are no
animal alternatives and
that's a very common scenario for us really.
Yeah. Okay.
Um, and it's not a problem if medications are not section 29
'cause we can very easily buy them from um,
suppliers write prescriptions to general pharmacies.
Um, but to try to highlight the scope of this problem,
I looked up the number of times just one
of the specialist hospitals needed
to prescribe a section 29 medications so far in 2025
and it's over a thousand times.
We've needed a section 29 medication
so far this year in one veterinary hospital.
Uh, so it's not a small problem for us,
it's an everyday problem.
Um, the current legislation is not really fit
for purpose for veterinarians.
Um, and that limited to provide a couple of
recent examples we've had.
Um, so last week we treated a dog suspected
to have malignant hypothermia, which is
a life-threatening emergency condition.
The life-saving medication for this dog was ling
so we didn't have it in stock.
Um, being section 29, we rushed
to the Auckland Hospital pharmacy trying
to obtain this medication for this dog.
Unfortunately, the 50 milligram capsules
and the injectable form are both section 29, so unavailable
to ignorance, the 25 milligram size is not section 29,
but was out of stock everywhere.
So as a result of section 29, were unable to
obtain the life saving medication for this dog.
Mm-hmm. Seizures are another great example.
A very common, um,
emergency condition we have to treat in cancer dogs.
You can't safely give an oral medication
to a dog having a seizure.
As you can imagine, there are no available injection
prescription animal to use.
So every seizure medication we have to use as an injection
is a human medication.
Pheno barone is one of the most commonly used
and well researched,
most effective antiepileptic medications available for docs.
We can access the tablets easy enough.
They are not section 29, the injectable form is section 29.
The current situation is we are able
to import the exact same injectable formulation
of pheno barone from overseas
with a special permit from NPI.
The problem is that usually takes about a month
to get the permit, get the medication, uh, sent to us.
When inputting these medications.
We are only allowed to import the medication to use in one
dog, um, not have in stock in a hospital.
Um, which obviously then means
we can't have it sitting on the shelf.
And that is of no use in an emergency.
So as a result, many veterinarians are ill prepared
to treat dogs with contractual seizures, which is,
in my opinion, a serious animal welfare concern.
If you imagine the average QE family,
two kids just bought a golden retrie puppy starts having
seizures, won't stop, goes to the that clinic.
They give the one medication they may have,
which is midaz midazolam.
They'll probably have no other medications
'cause they're unable to access them.
The dog continues to have seizures
because they've got no other better options.
Uh, and I've even heard of some situations
where vets have reached for using euthanasia preparations at
lower doses and desperation, unable
to access the well studied medications
that should be available to us.
The rationale of making veterinarians import
or compound medications that are locally available.
Did you want That makes no sense.
Um, I also don't feel there's any additional risk allowing
veterinarians to prescribe these section 29 medications
as they're already pathways that allow us
to access these same medications.
We just have to input them, uh, or get them compounded.
Um, that as a whole lot more red tape,
a whole lot more expense and massive time delays in many
cases which risks animal welfare.
Um, it also I think, makes medications unavailable
to many families because it often, uh, makes them, uh,
unavailable due to cost reasons
by the time we get the permit and put
these medications from overseas.
So if this legislation is gonna change
to allow additional medical professionals
to prescribe section 29 medications, then a change
to allow veterinarians
to prescribe these widely available medications should also
occur as it does not seem to be any rationale we can think
of for why veterinarians are admitted from be able to,
uh, prescribe them in the first
place. Thank you for your time.
Thank you for your time, Cameron. Thank you.
Thank you for bringing this one to the committee.
That's very interesting.
Did you have any, uh, input into the review of horticultural
and, uh, animal, uh, compounds that the Ministry
of Regulation conducted over the last 12 months?
Uh, not me, myself personally.
Who your organization? Uh, no,
I think I suspect the Vet council
and the NZBA the Veterinary Association have.
Um, and the main problem for us is that
there are only a few companies that make animal remedies.
Uh, and there's never going to be everything that we need.
Um, just being a small injury, particularly in New Zealand,
lots of medications are available overseas.
It's not register because the market's too small.
Um, so like, to be practical, we need access
to the human formulations.
Um, like fan is a great example.
I get such a cheap human medication
that no veterinary country is even gonna make it
because why would they?
Um, there's no money to be made of something like that.
Um, so yeah.
And, and then overseas everyone just pre prescribes humans.
That's I was about to ask, what are, what
happens overseas? Um,
O overseas? There's
access to human medications.
Um, so like the section 29 thing obviously is, as far
as bits are concerned, is unique to New Zealand.
Uh, and that all these
medications are readily available overseas.
We, we are blocked by the legislation. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you. Yes. Thanks guys.
Catherine, we need
Alright, we'll have another go.
Are they back? They're back. I'll ask a question.
Are we done? Oh, this one we go back to
all Margaret and Ryan, we uh got you.
Change rooms. Change rooms. Excellent. You can see us.
See us. We go We can when you Yeah,
we can see when you're standing looking.
Great. Take two. Take a step to the right. Yep.
You Ryan, Ryan coming to the shot. The middle. There you go.
Yep. No, fantastic. All right. No, we, we'll go back to you.
Um, that's what you were saying before
and we've got a couple of questions already.
Oh, thank over to you. Thank you. Can we turn it up?
Yeah. So I suppose to follow on from Margaret,
we we're a high needs community predominantly
of Maori whanau.
Um, we have
like quite critical staffing issues
and co like, um, workforce kind of continuity issues.
And traditionally this clinic has been mainly nurse
practitioner led.
Um, we, we have a lot of whanau
that have complex medical conditions
and I suppose section 29 really restricts our ability to,
um, with some, in some instances restricts us to kind
of do our jobs.
Um, of one example, I mean, last year,
I know it's not on section 29 anymore,
but something like B12, um,
IM B12 has been, um, run outta supply
and we've had to, um, it has had been brought in
through section 29
and has restricted us to be able
to provide something as simple as that.
Also, things like poor for blood pressure has been on
and off section 29 in the past, um, melatonin for our young
with complex mental health needs, um,
that restricts us our ability to provide
and continue to restrict,
provide prescriptions in that context.
Um, yeah,
I, I mean Certainly you know, we know that
with the shortage of uh, medications we've had
to use other brands and the other brands often are
section 20 nines.
Um, and it's by no means that we want, um, to say, look,
we are gonna prescribe every section 29 drug.
There isn't. We just need the, the,
the real foundation basics for our patients that we can
sit down and knowingly have that conversation with them,
have that, you know, we know sometimes it's
unapproved for good reasons.
Um, and we're certainly not looking to extend our scope
of practice beyond our means of course.
But it also gives us that opportunity if,
when we can't get a GP in, 'cause we've had nine gps
or 11 GPS over 10 years, that we've also got the ability
to continue practicing, um, as we would
as any other general practice,
which currently we don't have a GP at the moment.
Um, and that's a barrier and we are looking for one.
But, um, section 29 would also be a positive thing for, um,
not only ourselves but for our patients.
And we do, um, have a lot
of requests from specialists from the hospital that need
to have section 29 drugs, which we can't do.
So we've gotta go back to them once again,
their workloads overextended.
Um, and it just makes it a bit simpler
and easier for patients as well as ourselves.
Yeah.
Excellent. Yeah. Hona, you had a
Question. Kiara,
Margaret, Kiara, Ryan,
this is Hona Lindon here, the Green Party.
Love your work. Um, acknowledging Martin
and his award with the, um, recognition
of a King's Honor on Monday.
Beautiful. Um, te off your, uh,
reflects an urban community, but high needs,
but thinking across Taito generally,
and you've already highlighted the clinical shortages
that we have in community
and primary care, um, as nurse practitioners
and knowing a lot of our, um, Maori
and community providers rely on nurse practitioners.
Um, do you think that this change in section 29 could be
transformational in the way that we could utilize
our existing workforce?
Not ignoring, uh, the fact
that we have the doctor shortages in the north already?
Definitely. Like, I think, um,
look at the current state of workforce, um, issues.
I think it, for for sure, like it, it's definitely
supportive of our role
and supportive of the way that we would practice and others
and definitely practice.
And I suppose even we are an urban center,
but we do cater for people come from kaiko, people come from
to see us because the lack of access of, of,
of a primary care provider in their community locally.
Right? And so, um, I also do some telehealth work
and I'm also like reaching out
to some high needs communities down in the south island.
And if I'm not able to pro provide a prescription
that they're regularly taking, it's just such, it's,
it's such a headache and it,
and it puts a massive barrier on the, on
what I can provide, right?
Um, so yeah, I think from, from our perspective,
it would be supportive of our, our practice and,
and the communities that we support.
We certainly, um, you know, the NPS have grown this year.
We've got five to six mps, 40 ho, um,
and we are supported by other practices
around in our community, I guess.
'cause we don't have a gp. I, we've got some section 29
drugs that we have to prescribe.
How are we gonna do it, you know? Yeah. Yeah.
I'm, I'm not sure. I think we are just gonna have to go
and talk to one of the other practices
to be able to get that script done.
And I might just be for, for promoting a, you know, a PPI
that we, that's, that's used quite commonly these days,
um, in other areas.
Yeah. An example we have, we have a, um, a fire
that is under, you know, heavily involved in our
multiple services in, in, in Northland here.
Um, to get her a particular type of fleet, NMR
to help her move her bowels, I couldn't prescribe
and it was requested upon me to prescribe from
specialist care.
And to me, that seems we are not, we are not trying
to do flash stuff here.
We are just trying to do the basics. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Hold
On. Con congratulations
by the way,
on the 25 years of telehealth.
The celebration was this morning at Parliament.
I note that there's a new development to try
and, um, cope with primary healthcare
by having a, a booking service.
And it'll be really interesting
to see if section 29 considerations can be incorporated into
that so that it's used efficiently.
Thank you. No, thank you very much.
Awesome. Thanks so much for, um, bringing us back in.
Thank you.
Thank, I'm glad we made it work.
Got it. All right.
Committee, we'll move back into private session.